Boughs   and   foliage   of   phoenix   trees   cross   and   overlap   as   they   age ,   Mandarin   ducks   that   paddle   in   the   water   in   pairs   also   die   in   pairs ;
Most   dignified   of   chaste   wives   are   ones   who   follow   their   husband   even   in   death ,   Like   a   lone   mandarin   duck   they ' d   honour   their   men   by   choosing   to   their   own   lives   end .
A   widow ' s   vow   of   chastity   will   any   billow   quell ,   Her   heart   shall   be   composed   and   still   like   the   waters   of   a   deep   well .
During   the   day   we   mountains   climb   to   military   beacon   fires   observe ,   At   dusk   we   lead   the   horses   to   the   Border   River   for   water .
Soldiers   dread   the   sound   of   midnight   bronze   bells ,   for   gloomier   than   dust   storms   they   are ,   Like   the   Han   princess ' s   lute   play   during   her   life   in   the   Wusun   Tribe ,   grievous   and   bitter .
In   the   wild   under   clouds   that   stretch   on   for   miles ,   there   is   not   a   trace   of   a   township ,   Heavy   draughts   of   snow   fall   like   rain   over   the   boundless   desert .
Wild   geese   cry   their   way   through   overhead   night   after   night ,   Evoking   sadness   and   bringing   tears   to   even   the   barbarians .
They   say   that   still   shut   off   from   traffic   is   the   Pass   of   Jade ,   Those   sent   out   there   can   only   soldier   on   and   more   battles   brave .
Ever   more   remains   are   buried   in   the   wilds   year   after   year ,   Vainly   in   exchange   for   Hun ' s   submission   to   Han ' s   Court   of   allegiance   and   grapes .
South   of   the   Yangtze ,   a   kind   of   red   mandarin   grows .
Whose   trees   all   winter   long   have   leaves   that   remain   green ,   One   would   think   it   is   because   of   the   warmer   land   that   bears   them ,   But   rather   it   is   the   core   of   the   mandarins   that   is   capable   of   withstanding   the   freeze .
Such   mandarins   are   befitting   offerings   to   honoured   guests ,   Yet   the   distance   keeps   them   from   markets   reach .
One   abides   by   circumstances   for   such   is   fate ,   Nature   ravels   not   even   to   seekers   who   are   keen .
Yet   the   worldly   knows   only   to   grow   peach   and   plum   trees ,   Haven ' t   these   red   mandarins   trees   also   shade   and   foliage   of   green ?
Not   a   place   was   without   blossom   and   fluttering   petals   in   a   city   in   spring ,   The   willows   of   the   imperial   garden   swayed   in   easterlies   on   the   memorial   day   of   Cold   Fare .
At   sunset   the   Palace   set   alight   candles   everywhere ,   Light   smoke   rose   and   into   the   nearby   estates   of   five   noblemen   drifted   and   spread .
In   the   year   of   Kui   Mao ,   bandits   from   Xiyuan   targeted   the   State   of   Dao ,   they   set   fire ,   raided ,   looted   and   killed   until   there   was   little   left .
The   following   year   the   bandits   returned ,   attacking   the   neighbouring   state   of   Yong ,   but   did   not   cross   into   Dao .
Was   it   because   the   state   of   Dao   had   the   strength   to   put   up   defence ?   No ,   but   rather ,   it   was   because   the   bandits   took   pity   on   the   State   of   Dao !
How   could   the   Tax   Office   bear   to   extra   taxes   impose !   I   have   thus   written   a   poem   to   appeal   to   people   of   office .
In   the   days   of   peace ,   For   twenty   years   I   lived   among   mountain   woods .
With   a   fresh   water   source   close   by ,   Across   from   my   door   were   caves   and   valley   nooks .
The   tax   season   was   regular   in   those   days ,   I   could   sleep   unruffled   even   when   the   sun   had   made   a   fair   approach   towards   noon .
Till   a   sudden   change   of   times ,   Many   years   have   passed   by   with   me   in   armour   fighting   the   gloom .
Now   I   have   come   to   guard   this   state ,   And   gangs   of   bandits   have   once   more   made   their   move .
Are   townships   of   Dao   too   small   for   the   wicked   to   make   a   killing ,   So   they   take   pity   on   the   poor ?
While   bandits   raided   neighbouring   states ,   They   leave   the   state   of   Dao   undisturbed .
Are   Officers   of   Taxation   not   envoys   of   the   Emperor ,   How   could   they   in   comparison   to   bandits   be   not   as   good ?
There   are   those   pursuing   taxes   of   various   kinds   who   Powerless   people   push   and   on   helpless   people   punitive   pressure   put .
Who   is   there   to   these   people   save ?   And   be   a   model   to   the   world ,   a   man   of   virtue .
Right   now   I   contemplate   handing   over   my   army   seal ,   To   my   own   boat   pole   and   moor .
I   shall   take   my   family   to   where   we   could   fish   and   grow   grains ,   And   take   my   retirement   by   a   lake   or   a   river   soon .
The   river   is   cold   and   enshrouded   in   a   fog ,   the   river   sand   enshrouded   in   moonlight ,   I ' ve   come   to   moor   on   the   Qinhuai   after   dark   where   there   are   cabarets   nearby .
Courtesans   perceive   not   the   sorrow   of   a   perished   empire ,   Across   the   river   singing   of   A   Flourishing   Backyard   continues   into   the   night .
Against   the   sun   lies   the   elegant   silhouette   of   the   Zhongnan   Mountains ,   Over   the   summits   caps   snow   resembling   clouds   that   float .
Beyond   the   forest   the   sun   glistens   after   the   rain ,   Yet   the   Changan   City   yonder   seems   bleaker   as   twilight   reflects   upon   the   snow .
Gone   are   flights   of   wild   geese ,   Alone   as   you   are ,   where   are   you   flying   towards   in   whose   wake ?
In   the   evening   rain ,   I   hear   your   call   for   your   kind ,   Over   the   chilly   pond   you   hesitatingly   a   stop   make .
You   may   not   suffer   arrows   of   a   huntsman ,   Yet   in   your   flight   alone   you   must   care   take .
In   countless   valleys   and   ravines ,   towards   the   skies   soar   ancient   trees ,   On   as   many   mountains   cuckoos   warble   everywhere   in   glee .
In   the   mountains   rain   fell   overnight ,   Rainwater   trickle   off   tree   boughs   and   sprigs   like   hundreds   of   springs .
Over   there   women   fabric   weave   from   flowers   of   tong   trees ,   Local   men   sometimes   over   tuber   crops   and   land   disagree .
You   are   like   Wen   Weng   of   the   Han   dynasty   endeavouring   to   civilisation   cultivate ,   Who   dare   not   on   efforts   of   the   ancients   and   wise   men   of   the   past   idly   rely   and   lean .
Once   upon   a   time   an   immortal   flew   away   on   the   back   of   a   yellow   crane ,   What   remains   of   the   tale   here   is   a   tower   bearing   its   name .
Before   me   runs   the   clear   river   water ,   vivid   in   the   distance   are   trees   of   Hanyang ,   And   the   so - called   Parrot   Isle   is   a   lush ,   verdant   place .
I   look   towards   the   direction   of   my   hometown   as   twilight   starts   to   fade ,   A   haze   begins   to   mist   over   the   river   engulfing   me   in   a   homesick   state .
In   order   to   see   thousands   of   miles   further   afield ,   To   a   higher   level   one   must   go .
She   plays   the   strings   strung   between   shiny   copper   frets ,   On   the   instrument   her   hands   of   delicate   pale - skin   strum   and   stroke .
Hoping   to   this   learned   handsome   patron ' s   attention   draw ,   Time   and   again   she   plucks   a   wrong   note .
As   the   season   turns   to   spring   I   lie   brooding   in   my   underclothes   in   white ,   Against   hopes   and   wishes   White   Gate   was   all   we   had ,   now   little   remains   of   our   good   time .
The   road   is   long ,   as   spring   days   falls   into   night ,   so   comes   the   deep   blues ,   For   pieces   of   you ,   it   is   on   sleepless   nights   disturbed   by   shattered   dreams   of   you   that   I   rely .
Who   can   help   me   deliver   to   you   gifts   of   earrings   and   my   letters   of   love ?   There   goes   a   wild   goose   dashing   through   clouds   that   stretch   on   for   thousands   of   miles .
Last   night ' s   spring   breeze   sent   abloom   the   peach   trees   by   the   Dewy   Well ,   Above   the   antechamber   of   the   Weiyang   Palace   hovered   a   full   moon   at   its   zenith .
Princess   Pingyang ' s   court   dancer   was   graced   to   the   emperor ' s   bedchamber   enter ,   The   emperor   also   bestowed   upon   her   a   silk   gown   to   shield   from   spring   inclemency .
On   a   night   when   dreams   didn ' t   come   true ,   drenched   in   tears   was   her   silk   kerchief ,   The   night   deepened   yet   singing   continued   in   the   forecourt .
Her   beauty   had   not   left   her   yet   her   love   had ,   Up   she   sat   and   leaned   on   the   incense   burner   till   dawn .
Along   the   main   avenue   loud   are   cock   crows   in   the   chill   of   dawn ,   In   the   capital ,   orioles   chirp   agreeably   as   spring   draws   to   a   close .
All   doors   gape   open   at   the   sound   of   sonorous   morning   bells   from   the   Palace ,   Below   marble   stairs ,   royal   guards   and   batons   flank   government   officials   in   rows .
Flowers   of   spring   drift   past   swords   and   pendants   of   jade   in   the   procession   as   stars   fade ,   Swaying   willows   still   wet   with   dew   brush   past   banners   and   flags   on   poles .
By   the   Pond   of   Phoenix   stands   a   literary   man   in   a   league   of   his   own ,   Whose   verses   are   like   the   melody   of   the   elegant   Spring   Sun ,   a   tough   act   to   follow .
A   branch   of   crimson   glamour ,   the   peony   appears   embalmed   in   dew ,   A   reverie   of   a   reunion   on   cloud   nine   of   the   Magic   Mountains   woefully   illudes .
Seafarers   speak   of   uncharted   lands   in   the   East   Sea ,   Yet   all   anyone   has   ever   seen   of   it   are   billows   and   fog ,   nothing   to   prove   such   a   belief .
South   of   the   Yangtze ' s   mouth ,   they   speak   of   the   Heavenly   Matriarch   Mountains ,   Though   around   it   hover   clouds   bright   or   dim ,   visible   sometimes   it   her   countenance .
The   Heavenly   Matriarch   touches   the   sky   and   across   the   it   her   mountains   range ,   Her   imposing   manner   rivals   the   five   eminent   peaks   and   eclipses   Mount   Crimson   Gate ;
The   Sky   Terrace   Mountains   may   be   a   hundred   miles   high ,   Yet   it   seems   it   may   topple   over   in   the   south - eastern   corner   any   day .
I ' d   love   to   dream   my   way   there   and   the   land   of   Wu   and   Yue   visualise ,   And   take   flight   across   the   Mirror   Lake   and   the   reflected   moon   overnight .
I ' d   like   to   reflect   myself   in   the   reflected   moon ,   And   flow   with   the   waters   to   where   the   creek   of   Shan   begins ;
There   I   would   still   be   able   to   locate   where   Master   Xie   used   to   reside ,   Among   rippling   green   waters   and   occasional   howling   of   gibbons   so   clear .
Donning   a   pair   of   wooden   shoes   like   Xie ,   I   would   in   a   haze   stairs   climb   as   if   they   are   the   stairway   to   heaven   .
Among   thousands   of   precipices   and   valleys ,   hard   to   follow   is   a   trail ,   It ' s   hard   not   to   lose   your   way   in   the   shade   among   flowers   or   come   to   boulders   face .
I ' d   hear   dragons   hum   and   bears   roar   surrounded   by   murmurs   of   creeks ,   With   fear ,   the   deep   woods ,   forests   and   stratified   cliffs   seem   to   shake .
Clouds   livid   turn   and   rain   is   about   to   pour ,   From   the   placid   waters   rises   a   smoky   haze .
Suddenly   lightning   strikes   with   thunderbolts ,   And   the   mountains   crumble   away .
A   stone   gate   to   a   cave ,   breaks   open   in   a   thud .
Out   comes   the   sun   in   an   abysmally   deep   blue   sky ,   On   the   Terraces   of   Immortals   shines   the   light   of   day .
Donning   glowing   clouds   for   robes   and   riding   the   wind   like   a   courser ,   The   pagan   gods   of   clouds   arrive   treading   on   air   one   after   another .
There   is   a   tiger   playing   zither   while   green   phoenixes   drive   carriages ,   More   immortals   appear   to   their   places   take .
Suddenly   horror - stricken   and   aghast   with   apprehension ,   I   wake   up   frightened   to   a   deep   breath   take !
There   remain   only   the   pillow   and   bed   that   I   slept   on ,   Vanished   are   the   glowing   clouds   and   smoky   fog .
Without   exception   such   is   the   nature   of   worldly   pleasures ,   Ever   since   the   beginning   of   time   everything   passes   away   like   eastbound   waters .
Now   I   bid   you   all   farewell ,   I   wonder   when   I   could   hither   return ?
Release   for   me   a   white   deer   in   a   green   valley ,   So   that   when   I   must   travel   far ,   I   could   ride   it   to   eminent   mountains   visit .
Why   agree   to   bow   my   head   and   break   my   back   to   serve   the   influential   and   the   rich ,   And   deprivation   of   my   happiness   and   an   ear - to - ear   grin ?
Ah ,   yikes !   How   dangerously   high !
The   ancestral   pioneer ,   the   king   figure   of   Shu ,   When   he   the   region   reclaimed ,   how   distant   into   the   past   was   the   times .
It   was   some   forty - eight   thousand   years   after   that ,   Before   peoples   of   Shu   and   Qin   came   to   cross   paths .
West   of   Qin   stands   the   Great   White   Mountains   that   only   birds   can   fly   past ,   Its   trails   arduous ,   cutting   across   even   the   Emei   Mountains '   peaks .
The   opening   of   this   route   sacrificed   many   heroic   men   to   landslides   and   earthquakes ,   Before   there   was   a   planked   passage   built   along   many   a   cliff   face .
Its   highest   is   the   point   of   return   for   the   Sun   God ' s   carriage   pulled   by   six   dragons ,   Its   lowest   in   the   valley   gushes   and   whirls   white   water   between   boulders   and   rocks .
It ' s   a   canyon   that   not   even   yellow   storks   can   flit   across ,   A   gorge   that   not   even   gibbons   and   monkeys   could   clamber   and   climb .
The   trail   on   the   Green   Mud   Peak   winds   and   winds ,   Nine   turns   in   a   hundred   steps   along   an   entangling   track   in   a   rocky   terrain   .
The   idea   that   perhaps   a   raise   of   hand   could   touch   heaven   above   shortens   the   breath ,   Thus   the   need   to   take   a   seat   to   let   out   a   sigh   and   calm   a   heaving   chest .
I   wonder   when   you   shall   return   from   your   journey   westwards ? cIt   is   such   a   formidable   route   next   to   being   insurmountable .
Among   soaring   ancient   trees   you ' d   see   birds   hum   glumly ,   The   male   would   take   flight   followed   by   the   female   as   they   encircle   in   the   woods ;
Come   night   again ,   there ' d   be   cuckoos   warbling   under   the   moon ,   Filling   the   uninhabited   mountains   with   gloom .
The   daunting   route   into   the   region   of   Shu   is   more   daunting   than   climbing   the   sky ,   Hearing   of   this   is   enough   to   ashen   any   face   any   time ,
Waterfalls   and   white   water   race   to   uproars   create ,   Splashing   on   rocks   in   thousands   of   valleys   to   thunders   aggregate .
Such   is   the   route ' s   hazardous   nature !   Oh ,   you   are   a   guest   from   afar ,   Why   have   you   bothered   coming   this   way ?
Speaking   of   the   steep   and   soaring   Sword   Pass ,   One   guard   at   the   passage ,   Could   an   army   of   ten   thousands   ward   off ;
Whoever   garrisons   there   is   either   a   bandit   gang ' s   henchman ,   Or   someone   no   different   to   a   jackal .
In   the   daytime   there   are   fierce   tigers   to   flinch   from ,   And   at   night   there   are   pythons   to   avoid .
Who   are   looking   to   grind   their   teeth   and   suck   your   blood ,   Making   kills   that   they   have   already   done   far   too   many   times   before .
Although   the   Magnificent   City   is   said   to   be   a   paradise ,   It   is   never   as   good   as   home .
The   daunting   route   into   the   region   of   Shu   is   more   daunting   than   climbing   the   sky ,   I   turn   to   look   to   the   west   and   cannot   help   but   heave   sigh   after   sigh .
Up   high   on   the   town   tower ,   view   of   the   distant   is   one   of   fields   expanding   into   the   wilds ,   Resembling   the   vastness   of   skies ,   oceans   and   the   restless   melancholy   within   me .
A   gust   of   wind   comes   to   ripple   the   lake   and   hibiscus   blossoms ,   Slanting   a   drizzle   onto   walls   overgrown   with   vine   and   leaves .
Mountain   ranges   are   dense   with   trees   obscuring   even   the   best   of   eyesight ,   Winding   and   convoluted   like   the   intestines   are   the   rivers   and   streams .
To   the   south - eastern   land   of   body   tattoos   we   are   collectively   assigned ,   Each   to   an   isolated   county   where   word   and   correspondence   rarely   one   another   reach .
In   October   wild   geese   to   the   south   migrate ,   They ' d   end   their   exodus   here   and   stay   on   till   it ' s   time   to   their   homeward   flight   take .
Here   I   am ,   exiled   to   such   a   foreign   place ,   When   could   I   my   homeward   journey   make ?
The   river   runs   quietly   after   the   tide   has   ebbed   away ,   Forests   of   marshes   and   wetlands   are   swamped   by   a   sky   of   gloom .
Tomorrow   morn   as   I   climb   the   Dayu   Mountains   and   towards   the   north   look ,   I   shall   be   greeted   by   the   plum   trees   on   the   Plum   Peak   flowering   a   bloom .
Where   is   your   family   home ,   sir ,   As   for   me ,   I   live   by   the   Wide   Bay .
I   stop   my   boat   briefly   to   an   enquiry   make ,   I   have   a   feeling   we ' re   from   the   same   place .
We   drifted   her   to   the   south   together   in   troubled   times ,   Now   that   state   affairs   have   been   pacified ,   you   are   alone   in   your   northbound   return .
While   roaming   on   foreign   land ,   I ' m   turning   grey ,   Once   you   are   back   in   the   capital ,   you   shall   see   the   same   mountain   green   as   they   were .
The   bright   moon   shall   over   the   ruins   of   ramparts   shine   still ,   Under   starry   nights   I   remain   a   guest   at   the   border   town   where   we   once   gathered .
Fowls   of   winter ,   withered   grass   and   creeping   weeds .   Are   all   that   I   see   as   I   brave   my   nostalgia   everywhere .
Last   night   under   the   stars   catching   breezes   of   bedtime ,   We   had   a   rendezvous   west   of   the   Pictorial   Chamber   and   east   of   the   Cinnamon   Hall .
I   had   not   a   radiant   phoenix ' s   pair   of   glorious   wings ,   Yet   we   had   a   meeting   of   minds   and   binding   of   hearts   to   each   other   enthral .
We   sat   together   playing   drinking   games   over   the   warmth   provided   by   spring   wine ,   Surrounded   by   the   flames   of   crimson   candles   we   took   turns   to   each   other ' s   riddles   solve .
Before   long   came   morning   gongs   and   I   had   to   the   Morning   Assembly   attend ,   Like   a   drifting   fleabane   I   sauntered   on   horseback   towards   the   terrace   for   officers .
By   a   creek   in   a   ravine   lies   my   thatched   cottage ,   Through   climbing   vines   of   fig   trees   glisten   glowing   clouds .
Bamboos   more   elegant   seem   after   the   rain ,   Mountains   more   comely   look   in   twilight   hours .
Egrets   from   earlier   on   remain   perched   at   leisure ,   Here   autumn   arrives   late   and   late   wilt   flowers .
The   path   where   old   man ' s   beard   decorated   trees   is   being   swept   by   my   lackey ,   As   yesterday   I   invited   a   friend   to   come   this   way   out .
Being   far   apart   like   clouds   of   the   Song   Mountains   and   trees   of   Qin ,   With   brush   and   paper   we   correspondence   write   to   dispatch   yonder .
The   youngest   and   most   beloved   daughter   you   were   of   an   esteemed   lineage ,   Yet   you   married   me ,   a   reserved   scholar   without   office   but   a   trying   life .
You   searched   the   bottom   drawer   to   provide   me   with   better   clothing ,   and   You   handed   me   your   golden   hairpins   persuading   me   to   pawn   them   for   some   wine .
You   contented   with   having   wild   vegetables   and   bean   leaves   for   meals ,   You   settled   for   using   fallen   leaves   for   fire   and   for   more   you ' d   old   pagoda   trees   admire .
Now   I   have   achieved   a   salary   of   a   hundred   thousand   coins ,   Yet   I   can   only   hold   memorials   with   religious   offerings   in   remembrance   of   our   time .
Inside   the   neglected   summer   palace   walls ,   Peonies   are   still   glamorously   red   but   without   admirers .
Between   the   Gate   of   Jade   and   the   River   of   Gold   a   soldier ' s   life   toils   year   after   year ,   Engaging   in   battles   and   drills   with   a   horse   whip   and   a   glaive   day   after   day .
In   March   comes   spring ,   yet   snow   continues   to   fall   on   Zhaojun ' s   grave ,   I ' ve   marched   around   sable   mountains   and   seen   the   Yellow   River   thousands   of   miles   rave .
I   have   some   recently   fermented   wine ,   The   small   terracotta   pot   stove   is   warm   and   inviting .
There ' s   a   feeling   of   snow   coming   after   dark ,   Would   you   like   to   join   me   for   a   drink   tonight ?
The   bright   moon   rises   over   the   Sky   Mountains ,   Amidst   a   boundless   sea   of   clouds   it   waxes   and   wanes ;
The   wind   gusts   through   and   continues   for   thousands   of   miles ,   All   the   way   past   the   Gate   of   Jade .
The   Han   army   was   on   their   way   to   the   Baideng   Pass ,   When   the   Hun   coveted   for   the   shores   of   the   Blue   Lake .
For   so   long   it   had   been   a   war   zone ,   That   had   not   allowed   any   to   return   safely .
Those   wives   on   upper   levels   on   nights   like   this .   Would   be   restlessly   sighing   time   and   again .
By   the   Marble   Pond ,   wide   open   are   the   silk - screened   windows   of   the   Heaven   Empress ,   Audible   on   earth   is   the   sound   of   nature   singing   the   Yellow   Bamboo   verses .
Tales   tell   of   eight   steeds   in   historic   Zhou   that   could   ten   thousand   leagues   gallop   in   a   day ,   Where   is   their   master ,   the   longevity   pursuing   Emperor   Mu ,   who   has   never   returned ?
Out   here   without   a   neighbour   in   the   still   of   night ,   In   ruins   are   family   property   leaving   me   to   survive   poverty   in   the   wilds .
Surrounded   by   trees   of   yellowing   leaves   in   the   rain ,   I   sit   by   a   lamp   with   a   head   of   grey   becoming   senile .
Long   and   alone   I   have   dwelled   in   frustration   and   deprivation ,   Yet   you   come   often   to   visit   still ,   feeling   ashamed   I   have   little   to   say   for   myself .
Perhaps   predestined   is   our   fellowship   in   life ,   Furthermore ,   related   by   blood   we   are ,   making   us   ever   so   tight .
Delicate   and   graceful   when   she   has   barely   turned   thirteen ,   Like   tender   cardamom   sprigs   come   February ' s   new   moon .
Spring   breezes   waft   along   the   three - mile   long   Yangzhou   Avenue ,   Up   rolled   many   beaded   screens   yet   there   is   none   that   is   her   equal   in   view .
Amidst   a   famine   on   top   of   difficult   times   and   having   spent   all   ancestral   heirlooms ,   Scattered   in   different   corners   of   the   world ,   brothers   of   mine   have   been   roving .
Family   estate   and   land   lay   waste   by   war ,   Blood   relations   are   wandering   in   destitute   driven   from   pillar   to   post .
Thousands   of   miles   away   from   home ,   I   am   a   picture   of   a   goose   lost   in   the   wild   alone ,   Adrift   in   the   wind   like   fleabane   in   autumn ,   blown   away   from   where   they   had   grown .
When   we   the   same   moon   admire   tears   would   follow ,   Though   in   five   different   spots   we   are   tonight ,   no   different   are   our   hearts ,   all   missing   home .
The   three   shires   of   Xiang   meet   on   the   bounds   of   the   Chu   region ,   Off   the   Jinmen   Mountains ,   the   Yangtze   branches   into   many   a   stream .
Beyond   the   horizon ,   waters   of   rivers   and   creeks   gush   and   flow ,   The   mountainous   landscape   undulates   varying   scenes .
Next   to   an   approaching   dock   appear   a   township   and   villages ,   Billows   of   the   tide   rise   and   fall   to   the   distant   sky   stir   and   beat .
Here   in   Xiangyang ,   warm   is   the   sun   and   balmy   the   breeze ,   Perhaps   I   should   stay   on   in   the   mountains   and   drink   with   local   greybeards   for   a   treat .
To   freshen   up   I   gargle   with   well   water   that   chilled   my   teeth ,   With   a   clear   mind   I   pat   off   dust   on   my   robes .
I   serenely   pick   up   a   copy   of   the   Buddhist   Scriptures ,   I   recite   as   I   walk   towards   the   east   quarter .
Buddhist   true   essence   is   all   but   misconstrued   by   the   profane ,   The   worldly   suppose   the   absurd   and   preposterous   to   be   hope .
The   Buddhist   teachings   can   purify   the   spirit   deep   within ,   Yet   how   do   we   make   amends   to   save   the   soul ?
In   the   courtyard   of   these   austere   practitioners   all   is   sobering   still ,   From   verdant   moss   to   green   bamboos   Nature   vividly   unfolds ;
The   sun   rises   over   the   remains   of   morning   fog   and   dew ,   As   if   they   have   been   anointed ,   mature   pines   glisten   and   glow .
In   repose   feeling   no   need   for   words   and   eloquence ,   Pleased   with   an   enlightenment   I   feel   contented   and   whole .
I   grew   to   favour   the   Buddha ' s   teachings   in   my   middle   age ,   By   the   foot   of   the   Zhongnan   Mountains   I ' ve   come   to   retire   now   I   am   old .
I ' d   go   out   for   a   walk   alone   when   I   so   please ,   What   a   pleasure   this   brings ,   only   I   would   know .
I ' d   stroll   to   seek   the   fountainhead ,   And   there   take   a   seat   to   admire   the   sky   and   watch   clouds   grow .
Sometimes   I ' d   cross   path   with   a   greybeard   of   the   woods ,   And   becoming   too   engrossed   in   a   friendly   chat   to   return   home .
On   a   fishing   boat   he   followed   the   waters   admiring   spring   mountain   scenes ,   At   the   ferry ,   both   banks   were   lined   with   blossoms   on   peach   trees .
Taking   in   sights   of   more   reddened   trees ,   he   flowed   with   the   tide   losing   track   of   how   far ,   Then   he   came   to   where   the   clear   blue   creek   trailed   off   yet   there   was   no   one   to   be   seen .
From   a   distance ,   over   woods   rose   stalks   of   smoke ,   It   turned   out   to   be   a   settlement   of   thousands   among   flowers   and   bamboos   up   close .
The   visitor   introduced   himself   as   a   woodsman   under   Han ' s   reign ,   As   the   locals   have   not   caught   up   with   the   times ,   there   they   were   still   dressed   in   Qin   robes .
The   locals   all   lived   in   this   Wuling   fountainhead ,   They   here   established   their   families   and   habitat   after   migrating   from   the   outside   world .
Surprised   at   hearing   of   an   outside   visitor ,   villagers   hurriedly   a   crowd   gathered ,   Each   eagerly   invited   him   to   their   home   and   of   their   native   land   enquired .
At   dawn   they   swept   alleyways   clean   of   fallen   petals   and   leaves ,   As   dusk   veiled   the   sky ,   the   fishing   boat   and   woodsman   again   the   waters   followed .
They   said   they   secluded   themselves   there   from   wars   of   the   world ,   Then   they   decided   to   take   root   there   to   leave   the   worldly   behind .
Who   was   to   know   that   there   gathered   people   in   the   valley ,   There   seemed   only   uninhabited   mountains   with   layers   of   clouds   from   afar   on   the   outside .
The   woodsman   didn ' t   think   that   such   a   utopia   is   a   rare   sight ,   Still   a   worldly   soul   he   was ,   attached   to   his   hometown   he   remained .
Regardless   how   separated   by   mountains   and   waters ,   he   intended   to   exit   the   cave .   And   bid   his   family   farewell   before   coming   back   to   protract   a   stay .
He   believed   he   wouldn ' t   lose   his   way   since   he   had   been ,   He   never   could   have   known   that   peaks   and   valleys   have   since   shifted   their   place .
He   only   remember   that   it   was   deep   in   the   mountains ,   Yet   how   many   turns   on   the   creek   did   it   take   to   reach   the   woods   among   clouds ?
In   spring ,   where   there   is   water ,   there   bloom   peach   blossoms ,   How   could   he   tell   where   hides   the   heavenly   fountainhead ?
Do   you   not   see ,   Along   the   Galloping   River   towards   the   Great   Salt   Lake   the   army   trudge ,   In   the   broad   desert   feeling   at   sea ,   whirling   in   the   sky   is   ochre   dust .
At   the   Town   of   Wheelbase ,   winds   of   September   roar   at   night ,   Shattered   are   rocks   and   even   boulders   on   the   riverbed   that   has   become   dry ,   Rolling   in   the   wind   are   stones   and   pebbles   scattering   about   far   and   wide .
Over   in   the   Hun   territory ,   the   grasses   are   turning   yellow   and   horses   well   fed ,   Through   the   dust   storm   comes   an   emergency   from   the   Golden   Mountains '   west ,   That   requires   a   Han   general   to   lead   his   troops   to   westwards   expedite .
Even   at   night   General   Feng   never   takes   off   his   armour ,   During   night   marches ,   weapons   and   arms   would   scrape   and   clank   one   another ,   As   their   faces   are   exposed   in   the   wind   that   cuts   like   swords .
Upon   hearing   of   our   intent ,   the   Hun   would   no   doubt   suffer   a   fright ,   It   is   to   be   expected   that   they   may   not   be   willing   to   engage   in   a   close   fight ,   And   may   already   be   waiting   at   the   Jushi   Tribe ' s   West   Gate   to   submit   their   sacrifice   .
On   the   river ,   torrential   spring   rain   falls   levelling   grass   by   the   shores ,   The   history   of   six   short - lived   dynasties   seems   a   dream   that   saddens   even   twittering   birds .
Most   apathetic   of   this   raised   stronghold   appear   to   be   the   weeping   willows ,   As   always ,   they   bow   and   sway   to   veil   the   three - mile   long   banks   flanking   the   river .
Across   from   where   I   live   in   Luoyang   resides   a   young   girl ,   She   is   a   modest   beauty   just   over   fifteen   years   of   age .
Her   husband   rides   a   bluish   white   steed   wearing   a   bridle   decorated   with   jade ,   And   her   maids   would   bring   her   delicately   prepared   cuisine   of   carp   in   gilded   plates .
Her   residence   is   a   complex   of   red   chambers   and   picturesque   pavilions   with   a   view   each ,   Over   their   eaves   hang   green   willows   and   red   blossoms   of   peach   trees .
She   is   escorted   by   silk   screens   leading   her   to   board   her   coach   made   of   fragrant   wood .   As   she   returns ,   they ' d   take   out   precious   fans   to   welcome   her   into   a   opulent   canopy .
Her   husband ,   wealthy   and   honoured   in   the   bloom   of   youth ,   Is   rather   arrogant   and   extravagant ,   even   more   so   than   Jin   dynasty ' s   Shi   Jilun .
He   has   a   concubine   that   he   treats   well   and   to   whom   he   teaches   dances   in   person ,   And   he   flaunts   his   heroic   spirit   at   the   expense   of   squandering   away   coral   treasures .
Daylight   breaks   as   the   flames   of   the   nine - wick   lamp   dim   out ,   Sending   sparkles   and   small   fireworks   from   the   nine   wicks   flying   about .
All   day   long   at   play   they   are ,   so   much   for   singing   and   dancing   practices ,   After   make - up   the   lady   at   home   would   just   sit   by   the   incense .
Her   husband ' s   acquaintances   are   all   affluent ,   indulging   in   luxury ,   He   walks   among   the   likes   of   royal   relatives ,   the   influential   and   families   with   means .
Who   is   there   to   cherish   an   elegant   lady   like   the   historic   Yue   beauty ?   Poverty - stricken   she   was ,   she   came   down   to   washing   raw   silk   yarn   by   the   creek .
The   seven   strings   on   your   cittern   give   rise   to   music ,   I   listen   intently   to   the   portrayal   of   winds   rustling   pine   trees   and   feel   the   implied   chill ;
Though   I   am   also   a   lover   of   old   compositions ,   Nowadays   not   many   would   continue   to   play   the   genre   still .
As   easterlies   sough   through   a   drizzling   sky ,   Soft   thunders   strike   beyond   the   Hibiscus   Pond .
The   statues   of   gilded   toad   holding   a   lock   in   the   mouth   cannot   keep   incense   out ,   The   well   decorated   with   jade   tigers   is   deep   yet   long   is   the   rope   on   the   pail   to   water   draw .
Jia ' s   daughter   peeped   through   the   screen   at   the   handsome   Han   and   later   his   wife   became ,   Concubine   Mi   could   only   leave   the   Wei   prince   a   pillow   to   express   her   love   for   this   prodigy .
Be   still   my   beating   heart ,   compete   not   with   spring   on   blossoming   forth ,   For   what   remains   of   my   every   shred   of   longing   is   a   mere   disheartened ,   ashen   core .
People   and   worldly   matters   must   endure   ups   and   downs ,   As   time   comes   and   goes ,   today   becomes   history   in   one   day .
Places   of   historic   interest   remain   in   the   landscape ,   Allowing   our   generation   to   visit   and   their   significance   embrace .
On   the   mountain   top   the   monument   honouring   Yang   Hu   still   stands ,   Reading   of   the   inscription   brings   tears   to   everyone   always .
However   wholehearted   I   am ,   my   heart   would   seem   cold   come   parting   time ,   Fronted   with   a   farewell   drink   I   cannot   even   put   on   a   smile .
Candles   seem   to   sympathise   with   my   reluctance   to   leave ,   Whose   wax   drips   my   tears   for   me   till   dawn   arrives .
Among   clouds   in   the   colour   of   dawn ,   from   Baidi   I   take   my   leave ,   Though   hundreds   of   miles   away ,   Jiangling   is   within   a   day ' s   reach .
From   both   sides   of   the   gorge   come   incessant   howling   of   gibbons   and   monkeys ,   My   skiff   white   water   cleaves   leaving   behind   thousands   of   mountain   peaks .
I   used   to   live   by   the   waters   of   Nine - river   Town ,   I   used   to   go   about   the   nearby   waterways .
Though   we ' re   both   people   of   the   Changgan   region ,   I   left   when   we   were   too   young   to   each   other ' s   acquaintance   make .
Embroidered   screens   hang   low   on   the   outside   of   green   balustrades ,   Yet   still   in   place   inside   is   a   blind   of   crimson   brightly   painted   only   with   sprays   and   sprigs .
On   the   bed   padded   with   a   eight - foot   long   rattan   mat   lays   a   folded   duvet ,   The   weather   has   cooled   but   coldness   hasn ' t   yet   set   in .
Along   where   I ' ve   been ,   There   leave   my   footprints   on   moss   and   lichen .
White   clouds   hang   low   over   the   sandbar   along   the   shore ,   Amid   thickets   of   spring   verdure ,   closed   is   his   door   to   the   outside .
Clouds   float ,   all   day   long   they   roam ,   Yet   I   have   not   seen   your   travelling   soul   for   a   long   while .
In   the   past   three   nights   I   have   dreamt   of   you ,   You   were   cordial   and   affectionate   each   time .
You   showed   unease   when   it   was   time   to   bid   farewell ,   And   told   of   a   perilous   journey   over   the   past   nights .
The   rivers   and   lakes   en   route   were   turbulent   with   billows ,   On   board   you   feared   of   tumbling   and   loss   of   life .
Before   you   stepped   away   you   scratched   your   silvered   hair ,   And   looked   as   if   you   had   failed   to   achieve   the   kind   of   life   you   aspired .
The   capital   is   full   of   powerful   and   glorious   officers ,   Only   you   were   cast   aside   languishing   and   away   you   pine .
Says   who   the   heavenly   order   is   thorough   and   fair ?   As   it   burdens   an   ageing   fellow   with   more   political   strife !
Somewhere   ages   and   ages   hence   honoured   you   will   be ,   However ,   it   will   be   after   your   lonesome   death   in   time .
Spring   morning   arrives   unnoticed   in   my   slumber ,   Till   I   hear   birds   twittering   everywhere .
It   springs   to   mind   a   storm   raged   through   overnight ,   Off   it   blew   how   many   flowers   I   wonder ?
In   Duke   Qi ' s   mansion   we   often   gathered ,   In   Secretary   Cui ' s   residence   I   frequently   heard   you   play .
Right   now   south   of   the   Yangtze   offers   beautiful   scenery ,   And   we   meet   again   as   withered   petals   fluttering   amid   a   seasonal   change .
A   man   should   fight   for   his   nation ,   And   should   from   an   early   age   chivalrous   aspire   to   be .
Success   is   determined   on   horseback   and   under   horse   hoofs   failed   pledges ,   A   man   must   not   place   importance   on   the   corporeal ;
He   kills   and   others   dare   not   approach ,   Like   a   porcupine   with   flaring   spines   he   a   beard ,   moustache   and   sideburns   keep .
A   young   lady   of   Liangdong   aged   only   fifteen ,   Is   well - known   for   her   dances   and   skilled   pipa   play .
Today   she   performs   the   Jiang   flute   for   those   of   us   going   away   to   the   frontier ,   Bringing   our   mighty   army   of   soldiers   to   tears   that   fall   like   rain .
I   have   been   anxious   the   whole   day ,   You   departed   home   to   a   long   journey   take .
My   girl   is   getting   married   today ,   Upstream   in   the   main   river   a   small   boat   shall   you   convey .
Your   younger   sister   was   brought   up   by   you ,   Parting   brought   out   endless   tears   from   both   of   you   on   this   unbearable   day .
Gut - wrenched   I   was   in   seeing   you   like   this ,   Yet   get   married   you   rightfully   should   and   could   not   have   stayed .
You   don ' t   have   a   mother   to   teach   you   on   how   to   be   a   wife   and   a   daughter - in - law ,   I   am   somewhat   worried   that   you   might   fall   short   in   serving   you   parents - in - law .
Fortunately   they   are   a   gentle   and   well - reputed   family ,   Your   parents - in - law   should   be   kind   and   sane .
Living   within   means   is   a   virtue   to   be   adhered   to ,   Therefore   there   should   be   no   reliance   on   a   dowry   being   considerable   and   great !
This   morn   we   bade   our   farewells ,   Who   knows   when   we   shall   meet   again ?
Though   I   am   used   to   sentiments   endure   and   quell ,   I   cannot   such   gripping   emotions   rein .
After   seeing   your   off   I   returned   home   and   saw   my   younger   daughter ,   Down   the   ribbons   off   my   hat   more   teardrops   came .
The   nation   is   in   sunder ,   yet   mountains   and   rivers   still   their   stances   hold   and   courses   run ,   Spring   has   come   to   Changan   overgrown   with   unruly   grass   and   trees .
Current   affairs   have   me   deep   in   sentiments ,   and   tears   overcome   me   at   the   sight   of   flowers ,   Detesting   separation   from   family   so   much ,   even   the   twitter   of   birds   frightens   me .
Military   unrest   has   been   continuing   for   months   on   end ,   More   valuable   than   tons   of   gold   is   a   letter   from   family   and   kin .
My   hair   has   greyed   and   grown   thin ,   There   remains   almost   too   little   for   the   use   of   a   hairpin .
The   creek   here   is   clear   but   its   depth   unmeasured ,   Where   resides   a   hermit   clouds   drift   isolated .
Over   pine   trees   moonlight   gleams ,   Pure   and   unblemished   perchance   for   a   hermit ' s   sake .
Low - lying   shadows   of   flowers   in   the   thatched   pavilion   overnight   stay ,   In   the   herb   garden   mosses   grow   ingrained .
Here   I   am   about   to   leave   behind   the   worldly ,   To   the   Western   Mountains   retire   and   abide   with   rare   birds   and   wild   cranes .
What   of   the   Great   Mountains   that   hither   situate ?   Still   green   everywhere   are   once   warring   states .
The   creation   of   sky   and   earth   gathers   here   heavenly   splendour ,   Bearing   and   geography   determine   light   and   shade .
What   moves   me   is   seeing   vast   layers   of   clouds   afloat ,   I   look   out   far   and   wide ,   I   see   birds   their   homeward   journey   make .
One   day   if   I   could ,   I ' d   like   to   rise   atop   the   summit   of   all   peaks ,   Where   I   could   gather   a   sight   of   all   mountains   there   lay .
The   temple   is   well   nestled   amongst   dense   bamboo   groves ,   The   evening   bells   through   this   quiet   realm   toll .
Your   lotus - leaf   hat   reflects   the   setting   sun ,   Alone   you   travel   further   along   in   the   green   mountain   fold .
Gongs   from   the   watch   tower   resonates   on   empty   streets ,   A   call   from   a   wild   goose   shriek   across   autumn   skies .
Tonight   sees   dew   turns   to   frost ,   Home   is   where   the   moon   always   brighter   shines .
I   have   lost   touch   with   both   my   younger   brothers ,   Broken   up   is   our   family ,   unknown   to   me   is   whether   they   are   dead   or   alive .
In   front   of   a   shrine   dedicated   to   Kongming   stands   an   ancient   cypress ,   It   has   boughs   that   are   bronze - like   and   roots   boulder - like ;
Its   trunk   of   snow   white   barks   and   moist   branches   measures   some   forty   arm   lengths ,   Leaves   of   shady   green   soar   for   some   two   thousand   feet   toward   the   sky .
I ' m   reminded   of   a   visit   to   the   east   of   the   Magnificent   Pavilion   some   days   ago ,   Where   shrines   named   after   the   master   and   the   premier   stand   side   by   side .
The   towering   ancient   cypresses   there   have   branches   reaching   for   time - worn   fields ,   Windows   and   doors   of   the   shrines   are   lacking   panes   and   the   paintings   mottled   and   pied .
Such   an   old   cypress   tree   may   be   firmly   grounded   and   well   located ,   Yet   a   solitary ,   lofty   height   is   inevitably   subject   to   more   turbulent   winds .
An   imbalanced   tower   needs   load - bearing   beams   and   columns ,   So   that   tens   of   thousands   of   years   later   they   would   still   be   stable   as   hills .
He   flaunted   not   his   literary   skills   yet   he   already   the   world   astonished ,   There   hasn ' t   been   anyone   to   stop   a   felling   for   good   timber ,   yet   who   dares   to   topple   it ?
How   could   the   solid   core   escape   from   being   eaten   away   by   ants   and   mole   crickets ?   Nevertheless ,   amongst   its   fragrant   leaves   and   boughs   still   rest   phoenixes .
People   of   ideals   and   recluses   of   integrity   need   not   complain   and   lament ,   Those   of   high   calibre   have   forever   found   the   pursuit   of   a   congenial   employment   difficult .
Ribbons   of   clouds   gather   and   spread ,   not   visible   is   the   Milky   Way   in   the   sky ,   A   light   breeze   wafts   through ,   in   the   water   softly   ripples   moonshine .
Next   to   the   quiet   waters   is   the   sand   among   the   stillness   of   seclusion ,   I   raise   my   chalice   to   you   urging   you   to   give   us   a   recital .
However   your   singing   is   aggrieved   and   your   lyric   bitter ,   Before   you   could   finish ,   before   I   could   hear   all ,   my   tears   fall   like   rain   as   I   cry .
The   waters   of   Dongting   expand   to   the   heaven   joined   by   the   soaring   Doubtful   Mountains ,   Water   dragons   creep   in   the   water ,   overland   gibbons   and   foxes   howl .
We ' ve   survived   too   many   deadly   setbacks   to   arrive   at   our   posts   on   one   last   stretch   of   luck ,   Quietly   we   take   up   residence   here   as   if   we   are   hiding   out .
When   we   get   out   of   bed   and   when   we   eat ,   there   are   snakes   and   poisons   to   fear ,   The   moist   sea   air   dampens   everything   giving   rise   to   mould   that   smells   rotten   and   foul .
It   seemed   only   yesterday   when   drum   rolls   came   from   the   State   Office ,   Broadcasting   a   prince ' s   enthronement   who   is   willing   to   employ   the   virtuous   highbrow .
Then   came   a   decree   of   pardon   apace   as   if   hastened   through   thousands   of   miles   a   day ,   Allowing   even   those   sentenced   to   death   to   carry   on   living .
Those   in   exile   and   banished   got   to   return   to   where   they   were ,   The   Court   was   to   undergo   a   reform   for   a   thorough   cleansing .
The   State   Office   have   nominated   us   for   review   but   suppressed   by   the   Inspectors   we   are ,   We ' ve   been   unfortunate   and   could   only   follow   our   transfer   to   this   uncultured   land   of   Jing .
Low   ranking   secretarial   officers   we   are ,   there ' s   nothing   to   write   home   about ,   Any   error   could   see   us   grovel   in   the   dust   and   fall   victims   to   a   beating .
Those   who   came   with   us   have   all   but   left   to   be   on   their   way ,   The   road   to   the   capital   is   a   difficult   climb   becoming   ever   more   perplexing .
In   the   space   of   a   year ,   tonight ' s   moon   is   the   brightest   and   the   roundest ,   Life   is   determined   by   fate ,   not   by   any   other   route ;   Why   not   drink   when   there   is   wine   so   we   wouldn ' t   the   bright   moon   let   down ?
My   Jingling   friends   have   arrived   to   bid   me   farewell ,   About   to   go   yet   cannot   bear   to   break   away   I   drink   up   with   them   goblet   after   goblet .
I   had   only   started   to   wear   my   hair   banged ,   Playing   around   I   was   picking   flowers   in   the   yard   at   the   front ;
You   came   around   on   your   bamboo   horse ,   Encircling   chairs   and   benches   and   dangling   in   your   hand   was   a   branch   of   green   plums .
We   both   lived   in   the   region   of   Changgan ,   Two   youngsters   who   hadn ' t   thought   much .
At   the   age   of   fourteen   I   became   your   wife ,   Diffident   and   shy ,   low   I   held   my   head ;
I   would   retreat   to   a   corner   in   the   shadow ,   And   would   not   answer   to   your   call   after   call .
At   fifteen   my   brows   started   to   ease ,   And   fell   for   you   till   death   do   us   part ;
You   vowed   to   keep   your   promises   to   me ,   So   why   would   I   find   myself   on   the   lookout   for   your   homecoming ?
Yet   when   I   was   sixteen   you   had   to   leave   home   to   travel   far ,   Through   the   Yangtze   Gorges   passing   the   Yanyu   river   rock .
Which   in   May   would   give   rise   to   formidable   rugged   waters ,   Gibbons '   howling   would   come   from   precipices   on   both   sides   and   resonate   skywards .
The   hesitated   footprints   from   the   day   you   left ,   Have   already   become   moss - covered   and   green .
The   moss   has   grown   so   thick   that   sweeping   could   not   do   away ,   Till   autumn   comes   early   and   leaves   fall   to   the   moss   conceal .
August   sees   butterflies   turn   yellow   and   frail ,   And   in   pairs   they ' d   fly   over   the   west   chamber   garden ,   over   grass   blades .
Such   a   scene   saddens   me ,   As   I   sit   in   sorrow   and   wait   my   youth   away .
Here   secluded   tranquillity   has   no   bounds ,   Along   the   creek   on   a   boat   I   am   hoping   to   row   as   I   please .
The   evening   breeze   helps   launch   my   boat ,   At   the   end   of   this   flower - decorated   path   I   slide   my   boat   into   the   creek .
Night   falls   and   a   turn   to   the   west   takes   me   into   a   ravine ,   Over   the   mountains   in   the   south   the   Little   Dipper   beams .
Over   a   deep   pond   hovers   a   haze   thick   and   dense ,   The   moon   sets   low   behind   the   woods   in   the   gleam .
I   reflect   on   how   unpredictable   life   is   on   earth ,   I ' d   rather   be   an   angling   old   man   who   is   at   peace   and   at   ease .
Up   in   the   Northern   Mountains   among   white   clouds ,   Being   a   recluse   I   easily   in   my   environs   took   delight .
Imagining   that   I   might   see   you   I   started   to   climb ,   No   sight   of   you   saw   my   hope   dashing   away   with   the   wild   geese   that   flew   by .
Melancholy   rose   as   the   veil   of   twilight   fell ,   Early   autumn   seemed   the   time   when   sentiments   run   spry .
Every   now   and   then   I   could   see   returning   villagers ,   On   the   sands   they   trod   and   by   the   dock   they   waited   for   ferry   rides .
In   the   distance   trees   towered   into   the   sky   in   the   shape   of   shepherd ' s   purse ,   By   the   river   the   sand   bar   appeared   small   and   moon - like .
I   wondered   if   we   could   have   a   vat   of   wine   carted   up   here ?   And   we   shall   on   the   Double   Ninth   drink   to   the   good   old   times .
In   tents   and   marquees   out   in   the   wild ,   a   lavish   banquet   was   held ,   To   the   general ' s   military   triumph   over   foreign   tribes   celebrate .
In   tipsiness   the   general   rose   to   perform   a   sword   dance ,   Accompanied   by   thundering   drum   rolls   that   through   mountains   and   rivers   tremors   sent .
Since   our   parting   at   where   the   Yangtze   meets   the   sea ,   I ' ve   longed   to   with   you   reunite ,   yet   mountains   and   rivers   separate   us   time   and   again .
A   lone   lamp   illuminates   the   rain   of   a   chilly   night ,   Rising   mist   enshrouds   the   bamboos   dimming   the   green   by   many   a   shade .
Tomorrow   again   comes   parting   sorrow ,   Let ' s   cherish   the   rounds   of   farewell   drinks   that   remains .
I   think   of   you   on   this   autumn   night ,   As   I   stroll   along   and   take   to   poetise   the   cool   weather .
I ' d   imagine   that   in   the   mountains   it   is   time   when   pine   cones   fall ,   And   you ' re   likely   to   be   engrossed   in   thoughts   too   keeping   you   awake .
How   we   used   to   joke   about   afterlife   and   who   would   the   other   survive ,   Now   it   has   all   happened   right   before   my   eyes .
I ' ve   been   donating   your   clothes   and   I ' ve   nearly   given   all   away ,   I   keep   your   needlework   stowed   away   as   I   cannot   bear   to   look   at   what   you   left   behind .
I   am   still   sentimental   about   our   past   and   have   a   soft   spot   for   our   old   servants ,   And   I   have   burnt   offerings   for   you   after   dreaming   of   you   time   after   time .
Indeed   I   know   such   a   regret   is   common   in   many   people ' s   lives ,   How   poor   and   lowly   couples   face   hundreds   of   obstacles   daunting   their   married   life .
The   sights   from   the   Yan   Lookout   startled   this   newly   arrived ,   Hun   pipes   and   drums   in   Han ' s   army   camp   blared   and   roared .
Extending   for   miles   and   miles   is   a   field   of   grass ,   Year   after   year   it   shrivels   and   grows   back .
It   never   burns   out   in   bush   fires ,   Spring   breezes   would   always   life   revive .
In   the   distance ,   upon   an   old   trail   it   trespasses ,   The   vivid   green   stretches   its   way   towards   the   yonder   ruins   of   a   castle .
Trees   shed   their   leaves   as   wild   geese   southwards   migrate ,   The   northerlies   across   the   river   blow   and   chills   send .
My   hometown   lies   on   a   bend   on   River   Han ,   My   gaze   towards   my   distant   native   soil   could   only   on   clouds   over   the   land   of   Chu   rest .
I   have   cried   enough   homesick   tears   over   my   wayfaring   years ,   Alone   on   a   skiff   I   raise   my   head   to   the   sky   stare .
I   have   lost   my   way   and   seek   to   someone   ask ,   but   there   is   not   a   soul ,   On   these   waters   that   stretch   on   endlessly   in   the   glow   of   sunset .
The   sun   sets   over   the   western   hills ,   Suddenly   darkness   comes   over   valleys   and   runs   deep .
Moonlight   through   pine   trees   brings   an   evening   chill ,   Sounds   of   the   wind   and   springs   have   my   ears   attentively   take   heed .
Loggers   have   all   but   gone   home ,   In   the   twilight   haze ,   birds   have   just   their   nests   reach .
You   were   supposed   to   be   here   for   a   reunion ,   Alone   with   my   cittern   I   wait ,   on   a   path   where   old   man ' s   beard   decorated   trees .
Those   of   the   past   were   before   my   time ,   Who   would   be   there   in   future   I   know   not ;
I   think   of   how   heaven   and   earth   continue   on   perpetually ,   Alone   I   dwell   in   sorrow   and   down   flow   my   tears .
From   Yizhou   Wang   Jun   led   the   warships   downstream ,   Completely   paled   into   insignificant   was   Wu ' s   kingship   in   Jinling .
Sunken   to   the   riverbed   were   gigantic   iron   locks   designed   to   hold   back   Wang ' s   fleet ,   Over   the   Stone   Castle   flew   a   wave   of   white   flags   admitting   defeat .
Though   life   goes   on ,   times   past   continue   to   sentiments   evoke ,   Yet   mountains   do   not   orientation   change   and   through   them   flow   cold   waters   of   streams .
Territories   of   different   corners   have   since   been   unified   and   one   country   become ,   Among   rustling   reeds   ancient   forts   and   castles   still   stand   for   visitors   to   history   read .
When   I   was   a   traveller   in   the   region   of   the   Yangtze   and   Rive   Han ,   We   would   come   together   and   drink   till   tipsy   before   we ' d   retire .
Since   parting ,   we   have   been   like   floating   clouds ,   Like   river   waters   must   flow ,   time   flies ,   and   ten   years   have   since   glided   by   .
Today   we   gather   again ,   it   is   much   like   the   good   old   days ,   Except   for   the   thinning   hair   and   greying   burnsides .
Oh ,   why   do   you   have   to   head   north   again ?   Leaving   me   here   on   River   Huai   to   face   the   mountains   as   autumn   arrives .
Do   you   not   see   The   waters   of   the   Yellow   River   come   pouring   from   the   sky ,   Rushing   towards   the   sea   and   never   coming   back ?
Do   you   not   see   Our   elders '   grievance   over   grey   hair   when   they   a   mirror   look   into ,   That   was   once   ebony ,   now   white   as   snow   in   their   twilight   years ?
We   should   fully   enjoy   ourselves   when   we   feel   pleased ,   Let   not   golden   chalices   mirror   the   moon   without   spirits .
There   has   to   be   a   way   and   a   purpose   for   a   being   like   me ,   The   riches   I ' ve   spent   shall   one   day   be   reacquired .
Butcher   and   cook   lamb   and   beef   for   a   happy   feast ,   Whenever   there   is   an   opportunity ,   have   three   hundred   sips   of   liquor   at   least .
Master   Cen ,   Danqiu ,   my   friend ,   Please   drink   up ,   let   not   your   chalice   lay   neglected .
Let   me   sing   you   a   song ,   Please   lend   a   ear   and   listen   as   I   sing :   A   grand   banquet   with   an   orchestra   is   not   as   precious   as   it   seems ,   How   I   wish   for   intoxication   and   how   I   wish   from   which   I   never   wake .
Throughout   time   sages   and   men   of   virtue   have   only   the   company   of   solitude ,   Only   those   who   drink   leave   behind   a   reputation   next   to   their   name .
Duke   Chen   of   Wei   gave   a   banquet   at   the   Temple   of   Joy   and   Peace ,   Providing   pecks   of   wine   at   ten   thousand   pence   each   for   all   to   indulge   freely .
Being   a   host   why   would   I   excuse   myself   claiming   lack   of   means ?
A   steed   with   vivid   shades   of   hair ,   a   fur   coat   worthy   of   a   thousand   gold   pieces ,   In   exchange   for   more   great   wine   I ' ll   have   my   son   pawn   these ,   To   share   with   you   in   smoothing   away   our   millennia   of   sorrow ,   gloom   and   grief .
Zhang   Ji   had   in   his   hand   a   copy   of   the   Stone   Drum   inscriptions ,   He   urged   me   to   try   and   write   an   ode   to   the   inscribed   stone   drums .
Poets   like   Du   Fu   of   Shaoling   and   Li   Bai   of   transcendent   genius   had   died ,   How   could   I   his   request   comply   when   I   am   not   talented   enough ?
Failure   to   adhere   to   law   and   discipline   caused   Zhou   dynasty ' s   to   suffer   civil   unrest ,   Emperor   Xuan   exerted   himself   and   led   an   battle   to   bring   about   a   restoration ;
Assembled   in   a   grand   hall   he   accepted   the   congratulations   of   the   lords ,   Where   swords   and   jades   by   their   waist   clattered   as   they   with   each   other   shoulders   rubbed .
Out   on   an   autumn   hunt   on   the   sunny   side   of   Mount   Chi   he   showed   his   omnipotence ,   Capturing   every   bird   and   beast   over   tens   of   thousands   of   square   fathoms .
Recording   officers   made   notes   of   his   greatness   to   history   pass   on ,   And   chiselled   drums   out   of   rocks   by   smoothing   away   all   corners   and   roughness .
His   courtiers   had   first - rate   talent   and   skills ,   Prudently   they   selected   a   number   of   pieces   to   leave   there   in   the   mountains .
The   phrases   and   sentences   are   strictly   worded   and   profound ,   The   script   is   neither   clerical   nor   archetypical .
Since   the   inscriptions   are   of   great   antiquity ,   could   they   be   lacking   in   brush   strokes ?   Vigorous   are   the   strokes ,   like   swift   sword   movements   that   could   dragons   slash   asunder .
Submissive   scholars   did   not   include   these   inscriptions   into   the   Book   of   Songs ,   The   two   Refined   Texts   are   scanty   in   their   collections ,   rendering   them   rather   unsubstantial .
When   Confucius   toured   towards   the   west ,   he   never   made   it   as   far   as   Qin ,   His   collection   of   texts   was   like   that   of   celestial   bodies   but   without   the   moon   and   the   sun .
For   I   am   an   admirer   of   antiquities ,   it   is   my   regret   that   I   was   born   ages   to   late ,   Seeing   a   rubbing   of   these   inscriptions   makes   my   tears   pour   and   run .
I   remember   the   days   when   I   was   just   bestowed   a   doctorate   and   professorship ,   That   was   also   the   year   we   the   Yuanhe   era   entered   upon .
I   have   a   friend   who   is   a   major   in   the   army ,   He   made   arrangements   to   excavate   sites   for   these   stone   drums .
So   I   gave   myself   an   ablution   and   prepared   for   a   ceremony ,   I   reminded   them ,   there   couldn ' t   be   many   of   them   extant ,   could   there ?
They   should   have   any   uncovered   wrapped   in   felt   mats ,   Then   they   should   be   able   to   haul   the   ten   drums   here   on   camel - back .
If   our   emperor   could   allow   them   to   be   kept   in   the   Great   Academy ,   Then   all   pupils   could   participate   in   discussions   to   the   inscriptions   study .
The   Han   script   was   regularised   on   a   stele   erected   by   the   Grand   City   Gate   for   all   to   see ,   Many   came   from   all   over   travelling   great   distances   to   transcribe   and   take   a   rubbing .
After   gouging   out   and   picking   off   the   mosses   to   reveal   the   edges   and   turns   of   the   strokes ,   They   should   be   placed   in   a   secure   environment   protected   from   harm   and   roughness .
Under   a   mansion   of   extensive   coverage   and   wide   overhanging   eaves ,   The   artefacts   would   be   able   to   ages   survive   without   enduring   sufferings .
The   dignitaries   of   our   court   are   experienced   officers   at   work ,   Why   couldn ' t   they   weigh   in   on   this   matter   to   indecision   resolve ?
By   and   by ,   with   the   setting   of   the   sun   and   waning   of   the   moon   they ' d   suffer   neglect ,   For   the   past   six   years   this   matter   in   the   west   has   occupied   my   mind ,   yet   all   is   in   vain   .
Not   concerned   with   accuracy ,   Wang   Xizhi   used   to   sell   his   elegant   writing ,   It   would   only   take   a   few   sheets   of   his   scrawl   in   exchange   for   white   geese   that   he   loved .
After   Zhou ,   there   have   been   eight   dynasties   of   chaos   and   warring ,   Without   someone   to   the   society   set   straight ,   orderliness   could   only   stumble .
Nowadays   in   quiet   times ,   peace   reigns ,   Followers   of   the   revered   Confucianism   are   praising   Kong   Qiu   and   Meng   Ke ,   How   could   I   ever   make   them   see   the   merit   of   my   recommendation ?
How   I   wished   I   could   rely   on   their   eloquence   to   support   my   suggestion .
My   ode   to   the   Stone   Drum   Inscriptions   comes   to   an   end   on   this   note ,   Aye ,   my   idea   and   ideal   could   only   idle   way   in   my   consciousness .
From   a   temple   in   the   mountains   comes   bell   toll ,   the   day   has   seen   the   sun   set ,   At   the   Yuliang   wharf ,   uproarious   are   people   in   a   hurry   to   board   ferries ;
Along   the   sandy   path   there   are   those   turning   to   their   riverside   settlements ,   While   I ' m   on   my   boat   on   my   return   to   Lumen .
There   rests   solitude   gated   by   rocky   mountains   and   detached   by   a   path   lined   with   pines ,   Only   a   recluse   would   ever   come   here   to   retire .
Bamboos   from   the   Zhongnan   Mountains   are   used   to   make   reeded   pipes ,   This   type   of   instrument   originated   from   Qiuci   way   out   in   the   west .
Once   it   has   spread   to   China ,   the   tunes   have   evolved   and   unique   become ,   Here   is   a   Tartar   from   Liangzhou   playing   me   a   piece   of   note .
Nearly   all   those   around   me   let   out   a   sigh   or   two   as   they   listen ,   Moving   those   far   from   home ,   bringing   tears   to   flow .
Folks   listen   but   often   fail   to   its   essence   appreciate ,   In   stormy   winds   ascends   and   descents   lonely   music   of   varying   scales .
Sometimes   it ' s   like   withered   mulberry   and   ancient   cypress   trees   soughing   in   the   chill ,   Or   the   frenzied   screaming   of   nine   phoenix   fledglings .
Other   times   it ' s   like   the   coming   together   of   dragon   hum   and   tiger   roars ,   A   symphony   of   springs ,   streams   and   various   sounds   narrating   subdued   autumnal   serenity .
Suddenly   the   tune   turns   to   resemble   the   Lament   of   Yuyang ,   Projecting   the   lonesomeness   of   ochre   clouds   and   the   greying   white   sun .
Yet   another   turn   brings   about   the   Spring   of   Willows ,   Depicting   the   royal   garden   in   full   bloom   and   its   magnificence   glow .
On   this   New   Year ' s   Eve ,   the   hall   is   lined   with   candles   burning   bright ,   Here   I   am   savouring   a   concert   in   the   company   of   good   wine .
In   amongst   flowers   with   a   bottle   of   wine ,   I   drink   alone   for   there   is   no   one   close   by .
I   raise   my   chalice   to   invite   the   shining   moon ,   The   moon   casts   me   a   shadow   and   we   have   a   triad .
Nevertheless   I   have   them   around   me ,   Moments   should   be   enjoyed   as   they   be .
I   sing   and   the   moon   lingers ,   I   dance   and   my   shadow   whirled   under .
In   my   sober   moments   we   rejoiced   together ,   It   is   a   company   no   longer   once   I   am   drunk .
Such   fellowship   shall   last   despite   our   parted   ways ,   When   we   shall   come   together   again   is   up   to   the   remote   heavens   above .
The   Yellow   River   into   the   clouds   winds   and   undulates ,   One   lone   township   lies   among   towering   mountain   ranges .
Why   play   the   lamenting   Willow   Ballad   on   your   Jiang   flutes ,   When   you   know   the   Gate   of   Jade   spring   and   barrenness   separates .
The   emperor   of   the   Yuanhe   era   was   holy   and   mighty ,   Who   was   he   if   not   another   god   comparable   to   the   ancient   Xuanyuan   and   Fuxi .
He   was   determined   to   emerge   from   former   eras '   disgrace   and   imperial   radiance   revive ,   And   sit   on   high   in   the   Hall   of   Ordinance   to   receive   allegiance   of   all   foreign   tribes .
For   fifty   years ,   west   of   the   State   of   River   Huai   had   been   troubled   by   rebels .   Those   wolves   and   hyena   had   been   breeding   generations   of   ravenous   wildcats .
They   held   on   not   to   geographical   strongholds   but   plains ,   Seemingly   commanding   even   the   sun ,   they   brandished   their   spears   and   pikes .
Emperor   Xianzong   had   the   help   of   a   fine   premier   by   the   name   of   Pei   Du ,   Who   by   the   will   of   gods   rebels '   assassination   survived .
With   the   seal   of   a   premier   by   his   waist   he   was   given   an   army   to   command ,   On   a   gloomily   windy   day ,   they   marched   out   with   banners   in   the   name   of   the   empire .
He   had   Li   Suo ,   Han   Gong   Wu ,   Li   Dao   Gu   and   Li   Wen   Tong   as   his   vanguards ,   And   many   civil   servants   attending   as   military   secretaries   by   his   side   .
His   marching   lieutenant   Han   Yu   was   wise   and   brave ,   One   hundred   and   forty   thousand   solders   fought   like   bears   and   tigers   .
The   emperor   said :    Pei   Du ,   your   achievement   ranks   first   and   foremost ,   Your   subordinate   Han   Yu   should   for   this   event   an   essay   write . 
In   the   old   times   they   call   such   a   person   a   man   with   an   exaggerated   brush ,   This   is   a   matter   of   nothing   to   do   with   official   position   or   rank   .
And   modesty   never   applies   when   it   comes   to   shouldering   benevolent   acts .    His   words   had   the   emperor   nodding   again   and   again   to   his   approval   emphasise .
After   the   assembly   Han   had   an   ablution   and   entered   into   abstinence ,   on   a   pavilion ,   An   uninhibited   writing   with   exhaustive   details   came   from   his   brush   of   literary   style .
He   easily   adapted   from   the   volumes   on   Yao   and   Shun   to   Xianzong   describe ,   And   borrowed   from   chapters   within   the   Book   of   Songs   as   he   poetised .
His   composition   was   like   no   other   put   on   display   on   paper ,   At   dawn   he   laid   it   out   on   the   red   steps   inside   the   Palace   and   to   the   emperor   he   recited .
Then   he   submitted   it   and   said :    you   foolish   subject   now   dares   his   life   to   this   present .    In   praise   of   the   emperor ' s   feats ,   such   writing   was   to   be   on   a   monument   inscribed .
A   thirty - feet   monument   in   stone   was   erected   with   large   characters ,   Carved   with   vignettes   of   dragon   totems   and   sea   tortoises   at   the   base   to   support   signify .
For   the   sentences   were   exceptional   and   profound ,   very   few   could   comprehend   . Accusing   him   of   selfish   motives ,   some   approached   the   emperor   to   him   vilify .
The   monument   was   pulled   down   with   a   rope   of   a   hundred   feet ,   They   sanded   with   grits   and   stones   till   there   was   nothing   left   of   the   inscribed .
Nonetheless   Han ' s   composition   was   like   integrity   inherent   of   heaven   and   earth ,   Its   spirit   had   been   readily   absorbed   by   all   and   taken   root   deep   inside .
Like   the   inscriptions   on   the   plate   of   Tang   and   the   tripod   of   Kong ,   No   longer   in   existence   are   those   vessels ,   yet   those   writings   have   survived .
Aye ,   the   holy   emperors   and   exceptional   premiers   of   history ,   Left   their   eminence   clear   and   aglow   for   ages   that   followed .
Since   Han ' s   composition   had   not   the   opportunity   to   be   preserved   for   posterity ,   Why   don ' t   I   and   a   few   friends   follow   it   with   devotion ?
We   are   willing   to   transcribe   it   and   recite   it   ten   thousand   times   each ,   Till   we   are   foaming   at   the   mouth   and   our   right   hand   callused   and   coarse   .
So   that   it   could   be   passed   on   for   seventy   two   generations   to   come ,   As   a   model   for   prayer   box   inscriptions   and   litanies   for   enthronement   and   ceremonies .
Customary   services   honouring   the   Five   Great   Mountains   can   be   hosted   by   dignitaries   only ,   Situated   amidst   the   four   mountains   in   four   corners   is   the   fifth ,   Mount   Song .
Denoting   the   element   of   fire ,   this   land   is   barren   and   full   of   evil   spirits ,   Heaven   thus   bestowed   upon   the   mountain ' s   spirit   mighty   power   to   the   territory   oversee .
On   the   hillside ,   clouds   and   fog   wreathe   around ,   There   are   peaks   above ,   yet   who   can   the   summit   surmount   and   stand   on   its   top ?
The   timing   of   my   visit   coincides   with   the   season   of   autumn   rain ,   There   is   not   a   breeze   in   this   gloomy   weather   that   is   hazy   and   moist .
I   pray   quietly   mustering   great   concentration ,   if   I   could   spirits   touch ,   Wouldn ' t   it   be   because   probity   can   really   heaven   reach   and   nature   call   forth ?
The   Peak   of   Violet   Crown   stretches   over   to   join   the   Peak   of   Heavenly   Monolith ,   As   the   Peak   of   Piling   Boulders   seems   to   tower   over   the   Peak   of   Fire   God .
This   awe - inspiring   landscape   moves   me   to   dismount   and   pay   my   respect ,   Along   the   trail ,   pines   and   cypresses   lead   me   to   the   Mountain   Temple   of   Song .
I   hunched   my   back   with   respect   as   I   presented   preserved   meat   and   wine   up   the   stairs ,   They   represent   my   sincerity   and   faith ,   though   immaterial   are   my   offerings .
The   elder   of   the   temple   knows   how   to   god ' s   intent   read ,   His   eyes   are   wide   open ,   bright   and   piercing ,   and   still   capable   of   bowing   is   his   body .
He   holds   divination   wedges   in   his   hands   and   teaches   me   how   to   give   a   proper   toss ,   He   then   says   my   toss   returned   a   most   auspicious   forecast   matched   by   no   other .
I   suppose   being   still   alive   after   an   exile   to   savage   lands   for   so   long ,   I ' d   be   satisfied   if   for   the   rest   of   my   life   I   never   had   to   worry   about   food   and   clothes .
Forever   gone   for   me   is   the   hope   of   becoming   a   general ,   a   minister   or   a   nobleman ,   Not   even   the   blessing   of   the   mountain ' s   spirit   could   make   it   come   off .
Amid   howling   of   gibbons   and   tolling   of   bells ,   there   arrives   dawn   unnoticed ,   I   wake   up   and   see   the   frosty   sun   gaining   height   in   the   east   inspiring   awe .
Only   the   incompetent   would   laze   away   peaceful   times ,   I ' d   stare   at   a   lone   cloud   when   idle ,   and   seek   a   monk ' s   company   for   peace   and   quiet .
Now   I ' m   about   to   trudge   over   rivers   and   seas   to   a   corner   administer ,   Here   on   Leyou   Tombs   my   tribute   goes   to   Emperor   Taizong .
Here   beyond   the   Sword   Gate ,   I   hear   of   recovery   of   the   northern   state ,   Instantly   I   am   overflowing   with   tears   dampening   my   clothes .
Such   a   gleeful   day   calls   for   bold   singing   and   uninhibited   drinking ,   Taking   advantage   of   the   blooming   season ,   let ' s   gather   up   and   hit   the   road .
Setting   off   from   the   Ba   Gorge   down   through   the   Gorge   of   the   Magical ,   We   shall   first   Xiangyang   reach ,   then   head   towards   Luoyang   towards   home .
Tonight   the   moon   shines   across   all   of   Changan ,   Tens   of   thousands   of   homes   resound   with   the   pressing   of   winter   garments ;
The   wind   of   autumn   blows   away   not   the   melancholy   of   heart ,   Missing   their   men   over   at   the   Gate   of   Jade   women ' s   thoughts   drift   far .
When   can   the   northern   tribes   be   pacified ?   So   their   men   could   make   their   return   from   such   long   marches .
Here   on   this   remote   pass   of   the   Ba   Mountains ,   There   is   only   us   on   a   journey   of   ten   thousand   leagues .
On   a   night   among   remnants   of   snow   in   disorienting   mountains ,   There   is   only   loneliness   on   a   foreign   land   to   spring   greet .
By   and   by   family   have   grown   apart ,   Becoming   closer   to   me   are   servants   and   lackeys .
What   is   making   the   wayfaring   all   the   more   tormenting   is   the   fact   that   Tomorrow   comes   lunar   New   Year .
To   the   north   and   to   the   south ,   I   see   waters   of   spring   all   round ,   Yet   all   that   have   ever   come   day   after   day   are   waterfowls .
The   footpath   has   never   been   swept   to   a   guest   receive ,   It ' s   a   first   to   gape   open   my   humble   door   for   a   visitor   nowadays .
If   you   don ' t   mind   drinking   with   my   neighbour ,   an   old   fellow ,   I   shall   holler   across   the   fence   to   invite   him   to   share   the   remaining   rounds .
Out   went   wedding   candles   in   the   bedchamber   last   night ,   Out   in   the   front   hall   she   shall   curtsy   to   her   parents - in - law   after   sunrise .
On   finishing   her   make - up   she   asked   her   husband   shyly :   Were   her   brows   drawn   in   her   favour ,   well   shaped   and   refined ?
Our   imperial   court   is   our   pole   star   that   shall   never   be   replaced ,   The   intruders   from   the   western   mountains   had   better   not   invasions   strive .
The   pitiful   last   master   of   Shu   at   least   warded   his   lineage   for   a   generation ,   Oh   allow   me   to   recite   Zhuge ' s   favourite   Liangfu   melody   in   the   twilight .
A   Shu   Monk   holding   a   cittern   of   silky   smooth   timbre ,   Comes   down   the   west   side   of   the   Emei   Peak .
He   plays   for   me ,   I   hear   what   seems   like   a   sonata   of   rustling   pines   in   tens   of   thousands   of   ravines .
It   is   as   if   there   was   cleansing   spring   water   running   through   my   mind ,   Fused   with   bell   toll ,   the   tune   lingers   on   in   my   ears .
Before   I   know   it ,   the   blue   mountains   have   dusky   become ,   I   wonder   if   the   weathered   clouds   a   few   shades   dimmer   feel ?
At   the   tender   age   of   fifteen   or   twenty ,   On   foot   he   could   grab   a   Hun   horse   from   the   field   to   take   as   his   ride .
Once   in   the   mountains ,   he   shot   dead   a   white - forehead   tiger ,   Just   like   the   yellow - beard   son   of   Lord   Cao   from   the   Ye   Shire .
He   is   capable   of   battling   from   place   to   place   for   over   five   hundred   miles ,   Armed   with   a   sword   he   could   the   onslaught   of   a   million   fighters   survive .
The   Han   army ' s   attacks   were   as   quick   as   thunderbolts ,   Dispersed   were   Hun ' s   battle   array   as   if   they   were   daunted   by   puncture   vines .
The   ever   victorious   Grand   General   Wei   Qing   had   never   lost   a   battle   on   heaven ' s   wish ,   It   had   to   be   fate   that   General   Li   Guang ' s   valour   didn ' t   result   in   military   feats .
Like   Li ,   this   old   general   has   been   cast   aside ,   gradually   his   physique   has   feeble   become ,   Life   goes   on ,   wasted   is   time ,   leaving   him   a   head   of   grey .
Once   his   dashing   arrows   would   go   for   prey ' s   eyes ,   Now   his   elbows   dangle   like   drooping   willows   that   sway .
When   idle ,   sometimes   you ' d   see   him   looking   after   a   stall   of   melons ,   Or   willows   that   he   planted   by   his   door   after   Tao   Yuanming   the   sage .
Along   the   humble   alleyway   only   ancient   trees   are   there   to   stay ,   And   his   windows   look   out   to   the   lonesomeness   of   cold   mountains .
He   still   aspires   to   being   like   the   Di   Gong   faithful   enough   to   find   water   in   Shule ,   And   to   never   be   like   Guan   Fu   from   the   Ying   River   who   was   rash   when   intoxicated .
These   days ,   there   are   reports   of   emergencies   at   the   foothills   of   the   Helan   Mountains ,   Day   and   night ,   frequently   comes   the   delivery   of   military   reports   to   and   fro .
The   governor   of   the   Three   Rivers   region   has   been   recruiting   youths   to   the   army   join ,   And   the   emperor   has   issued   five   edicts   to   his   service   re - employ .
Now   he   hopes   for   a   great   bow   from   the   Yan   region   to   take   down   the   other   side ' s   warriors ,   He   may   perish   but   letting   his   emperor   be   menaced   by   enemies   is   not   what   he   would   allow .
Disfavour   not   this   general   who   used   to   guard   the   High   Cloud   Fort ,   He   is   still   capable   of   going   all   out   for   a   noble   exploit .
A   thousand   years   have   gone   by ,   in   remembrance   of   him   here   I   am   in   tears ,   Though   we   are   from   different   times ,   as   desolated   as   his   life   was ,   mine   is   bleak .
Nestled   in   the   landscape   is   his   old   cottage ,   all   that   remains   of   him   is   his   writings ,   Like   the   deserted   terraces   under   sunlit   clouds   in   the   Magic   Mountains ,   ever   as   dreamy .
Regretfully   the   palace   of   Chu   has   long   perished ,   Where   the   boatmen   has   pointed   out   as   historic   ruins   may   not   be   genuine .
Lady   Cai   of   Han   gave   rise   to   tunes   specific   to   Tartar   reed   pipes .
And   composed   a   song   of   eighteen   verses .
Tartars   were   touched   weeping   on   grass   over   the   border ,   Even   the   Han   envoy   sent   to   bring   her   home   felt   her   parting   sorrow   and   felt   for   her .
The   player   started   with   a   high   note   in   Shang   followed   by   low   keys   of   Jue   and   Yu ,   Abuzz   in   the   background   is   the   autumnal   leaves   rustling   in   the   outskirts .
Master   Dong ,   how   your   musical   attainments   do   heaven   reach ,   Even   fairies   deep   in   the   mountains   would   come   to   listen   in   and   heed .
Change   the   tempo   between   slow   and   quick   is   nothing   but   a   few   gestures   of   your   hands ,   Every   turn   of   a   tune   is   so   charming   with   an   ever   affectionate   feel .
In   the   remote   mountains   where   hundreds   of   birds   scatter   in   the   sky   would   here   gather ,   An   overcast   sky   for   thousands   of   miles   would   suddenly   sunshine   beam .
There   resounds   the   sadness   of   fledglings   of   wild   geese   separated   from   their   flock   at   night ,   Much   like   Lady   Cai ' s   Tartar   sons   crying   for   their   mother   not   to   leave .
Even   rivers   could   be   made   to   quieten   down   and   ease   their   waves ,   And   birds   would   take   notice   and   stop   their   tweets .
Betrothed   to   the   distant   Wusun   tribe   far   from   home ,   the   Han   princess   bewailed   her   fate ,   Even   a   general   like   Xue   Rengui   would   over   dusty   Luosuo ' s   remoteness   grieve .
A   sudden   wind   comes   to   drift   these   mourning   notes   as   they   turn   and   intensify ,   In   the   gusty   wind ,   woods   rustle   and   whistle ,   and   rain   falls   hard   on   roof   tiles ;
Cascading   off   tips   and   tops   of   soughing   trees   are   springing   rainwater ,   Wild   deer   underneath   feebly   bleat   doleful   cries .
By   the   eastern   keep   of   Changan   where   you   are   assigned   to   take   up   residence ,   There   stands   the   Gate   of   Jadeite   opposite   the   Pond   of   Phoenix ,   Fame   and   fortune   should   shackle   you   not   for   you   are   a   talented   and   learned   scholar ,   Day   and   night ,   how   I   wish   for   you   to   hither   arrive   with   your   cittern .
I   wouldn ' t   recommend   the   Wozhou   Mountains   for   your   seclusion ,   After   all ,   as   a   place   to   retreat   to ,   it   has   become   well - known .
I ' m   particularly   fond   of   the   bulrush   area   by   the   ravine ,   There   are   orioles   singing   above   deep   in   the   groves .
Spring   monsoon   rain   and   the   evening   tide   each   other   aggravate ,   By   the   dock   in   the   wild   wavers   and   sways   a   deserted   boat .
The   eminent   Taihua   Mountains   tower   over   Xianyang   the   ancient   capital ,   Into   the   sky   soar   the   Trinity   Peaks   that   could   not   have   been   pared   by   hand .
To   the   north   the   Yellow   River ,   Taihua   give   the   Fort   of   Hangu   its   advantage ,   The   main   road   extends   westwards   to   the   worship   grounds   of   Han .
The   Taiyi   Peak   stands   close   to   the   heavenly   capital ,   The   mountains   range   towards   the   sea .
I   turn   around   and   see   white   clouds   gather ,   Then   I   walk   into   a   hazy   obscurity ,   there   I   see   not   a   thing .
The   central   peak   dominates   the   skyline ,   Distinctive   of   every   ridge   and   valley   is   its   contour   and   its   scene .
I ' m   after   a   place   to   stay   for   the   night ,   I   shall   ask   of   that   logger   over   there   from   across   the   creek .
Down   this   avenue   the   Hun   used   to   travel   to   their   allegiance   pledge   and   tribute   pay ,   Today   in   the   western   outskirts   of   the   capital   the   Hun   heavily   populate .
Fragile   and   easily   frightened   I   have   become ,   My   soul   remains   lacking   of   spirit   that   has   been   scared   away .
It   was   only   recently   that   I   could   to   the   capital   return ,   Is   it   really   the   esteemed   emperor ' s   will   to   have   me   posted   away ?
I   suppose   talent   I   have   not   yet   growing   senile   I   am   by   the   day ,   I   cannot   help   but   hold   my   horse   to   turn   around   for   another   look   of   the   main   palace   gate .
This   path   ends   in   the   white   clouds ,   Spring   meanders   like   a   long ,   winding   creek .
Occasionally   petals   of   flowers   fall   and   drift ,   Along   in   the   gurgling   waters   the   fragrance   would   spread   and   far   it   streams .
The   door   to   my   retreat   opens   towards   a   mountain   trail ,   Deep   in   the   shade   of   willows   is   where   I   scrolls   and   volumes   of   books   keep .
Everyday   sunlight   filters   through   dense   foliage ,   Shining   radiantly   at   times   on   my   robes   and   on   me .
 A   Sword   of   Value    tells   of   the   lonesomeness   of   a   gifted   man   of   letters   like   mine ,   Still   a   vagabond   wayfaring   the   world   I   am   who   is   about   to   another   year   idle   away .
Before   me   yellowing   leaves   flicker   and   waver   in   the   wind   in   the   rain ,   In   brothels   the   rich   and   the   wealthy   enjoy   flutes   and   string   instruments   play .
Novel   impressions   can   be   easily   dampened   by   practical   concerns ,   Old   affections   have   long   been   severed   by   their   now   married   state .
Last   night   my   girdle   came   undone   by   itself ,   This   morning   around   me   flew   moths ;   both   are   signs   of   expecting .
Therefore   I   shan ' t   be   neglectful   with   my   rouge ,   For   perhaps   my   master   may   be   returning   home   presently .
By   the   Rose   Finch   Bridge   now   grow   flowers   and   weeds   running   wild ,   At   the   end   of   what   used   to   be   the   Black   Robes   Row   the   sun   makes   its   incline .
Sparrows   that   used   to   gather   in   the   courts   of   Wang   and   Xie   of   the   Jin   dynasty ,   Now   scattered   around   commoners '   huts ,   cottages   and   their   ordinary   street   life .
In   the   twenty - six   year   of   Kaiyuan ,   I   had   a   guest   who   followed   Royal   Inspector   Zhang   to   the   border   and   returned ,   he   showed   us   a   poem   he   wrote   to   a   local   folk   melody .
I   became   sentimental   about   the   reality   of   war ,   and   wrote   a   poem   myself   to   the   same   melody   in   response .
Han   has   a   troubling   and   volatile   frontier   in   the   north - east ,   Han ' s   soldiers   have   to   leave   their   home   to   battle   a   cruel   and   ferocious   breed .
Young   men   on   the   battlefield   are   supposed   to   be   driven   by   impulse   with   a   vengeance ,   This   is   extraordinarily   well   received   by   His   Majesty .
They   march   to   the   rhythm   of   gongs   and   drums   towards   the   Elm   Gate ,   In   the   Stony   Mountains   their   banners   and   flags   a   long   procession   decorate .
From   the   colonel   on   the   frontier   come   summons   to   arms   over   the   sea   of   desert ,   The   Hun   chieftain ' s   army   and   beacon   have   arrived   at   Mount   Wolverine   and   are   in   place .
At   the   frontier   it   is   an   endless   stretch   of   deserted   landscape ,   The   Hun   cavalry   charge   down   the   hills   like   torrential   windswept   rain .
There   perish   half   of   the   soldiers   at   the   front   fighting   to   their   death ,   Yet   in   the   rare   in   the   camp   dancing   to   melodies   are   beautiful   ladies !
Grasses   over   the   border   have   shrivelled ,   ending   the   season   of   fall   over   the   Great   Desert ,   In   the   fading   sun ,   the   solitary   border   town   is   scarce   on   soldiers   and   fighters .
Far   and   away   at   the   borders ,   soldiers   donning   armour   garrison   hard   and   long ,   Back   home   tears   begin   to   flow   the   morning   their   husbands   are   gone ;
Gut - wrenched   are   young   ladies   south   of   the   border   town ,   As   soldiers   dispatched   to   north   of   the   Ji   region   in   vain   fond   memory   recall .
What   is   one   to   do   with   time   in   the   unpredictable   wilds   over   the   border ?   Unapproachable   is   the   vast   territory   of   oblivion .
Overcast   with   a   combative   air   is   the   weather   all   day   long ,   The   bronze   bells   could   ring   any   minute   in   the   cold   of   night   calling   to   cross   swords .
Do   you   not   see   how   miserable   a   soldier ' s   life   is   on   the   battlefield ?   Long   live   the   spirit   of   General   Li   of   Han ,   who   is   held   venerable   by   all   to   this   day .
My   reluctance   to   leave   takes   me   back   to   the   Xie   residence   in   my   dream ,   Where   the   cloisters   encircle   and   balustrades   at   angles   traverse   and   meet .
Only   the   moon   in   this   spring   garden   seems   sentimental   and   sympathetic ,   As   it   sheds   light   on   drifting   petals   for   a   soul   suffering   a   parting   of   ways   like   me .
Being   thousands   of   miles   away   from   home ,   Kept   for   twenty   years   in   the   palace   she   has   been .
Upon   hearing   a   folk   song   of   her   region ,   Tears   come   streaming   down   both   her   cheeks .
You   were   banished   from   the   Han   Court   to   hither   migrate   and   rove ,   Where   remains   little   but   the   venerable   tale   of   a   Chu   poet   and   his   grief .
I   stay   behind   others   lingering   in   the   grasses   of   autumn   seeking   I   know   not   what ,   In   the   woods   comes   nothing   but   coldness   as   the   sun   westwards   leans .
The   Han   Emperor   Wen   might   be   wise ,   yet   his   recognition   of   you   seemed   slight ,   By   the   billowing   River   Xiang ,   you   think   of   the   Chu   poet ,   yet   he   could   no   longer   feel .
Amid   the   lonesome   landscape   and   drifting   of   the   season ' s   shedding ,   Feeling   sorry   for   you ,   I   fathom   not   why   you   must   be   sent   so   distant   afield .
Within   the   walls   of   the   Division   blossoms   shadow   one   another   in   twilight ,   Chirping   on   their   way   through   are   birds   on   their   way   home .
As   stars   ascend ,   lights   by   the   main   palace   gate   vividly   glisten ,   The   moon   rises   high   up   in   the   sky   shining   on   all .
I   cannot   sleep   as   I   listen   attentively   for   the   turn   of   the   golden   gate   lock ,   A   breeze   reminds   me   of   the   seashell   wind   chimes   over   the   portals .
In   the   morning   I ' m   about   to   a   sealed   report   submit ,   In   the   meantime   I   cannot   help   but   ask   for   the   time   every   so   often .
How   I   adore   Mister   Meng ,   Well   known   in   the   world   for   his   literary   talent   all   round ,   In   his   youth   he   cast   way   wealth   and   fame .
In   his   old   age   he   takes   to   a   reclusive   life   under   pine   trees   and   floating   clouds .
Under   the   moon   a   merry   saint   he   frequently   becomes ,   a   tipsy   kind ,   Instead   of   serving   an   emperor ,   he ' d   rather   be   attending   to   plants   and   flowers .
How   could   the   ordinary   ever   truly   learn   to   such   a   tall   order   admire ?   In   vain   I   have   tried   to   follow   his   pure   essence ,   here   is   to   him   I   take   a   bow .
I ' ve   heard   what   people   say   of   the   magnificent   Dongting   Lake ,   Today   high   up   on   the   Yueyang   Tower   I   see   it   for   myself .
Its   broad   and   expansive   waters   defines   Wu   to   the   east   and   Chu   to   the   south ,   The   sun   and   the   moon   rise   and   fall   over   its   vast   confines .
No   word   has   reached   me   from   kith   and   kin ,   Illnesses ,   senility   and   a   lonely   boat   are   all   that   could   be   considered   mine .
I   hear   that   over   the   dividing   range   warfare   continues   in   the   north ,   Leaning   against   the   balustrade   I   mourn ,   I   sob ,   I   weep   and   I   cry .
In   a   wood   of   withered   mulberry   trees   loudly   creaked   cicadas ,   Such   is   the   August   scenery   of   the   Xiaoguan   Pass .
History   has   it   that   soldiers   sent   to   the   You   and   Bing   regions ,   Would   eventually   bite   the   dust   or   waste   away   like   dust .
One   should   neither   envy   nor   take   after   a   wandering   cavalier ,   Who   spends   his   time   bragging   about   his   nag .
Passing   through   myriads   of   peaks   and   valleys   I   have   come   to   Jingmen ,   Still   in   existence   is   the   town   from   where   Lady   Zhaojun   of   Han   was   raised .
Taking   departure   from   the   palace   she   was   sent   to   the   desert   in   the   north ,   All   that   was   left   is   her   overgrown   tomb   to   face   the   setting   sun   these   days .
On   her   portrait ,   discernible   should   have   been   her   countenance   of   youth ,   On   moonlit   nights ,   all   that   could   return   to   the   court   of   Han   was   her   soul   in   vain .
A   thousand   years   since ,   her   pipa   melodies   are   now   accompanied   by   Hun   lyrics   That   flow   with   apparent   bitterness   and   lament   in   every   pick   and   strum   of   play .
The   Master   of   Shu   arrived   at   the   Three   Gorges   coveting   after   Wu ,   Unsuccessful   was   his   attempt   and   soon   died   he   in   the   Palace   of   Eternal   Peace .
Now   barren   mountains   once   flew   his   banners   and   flags ,   Where   once   majestic   and   palatial   now   lies   a   shrine   in   the   wild   without   upkeep .
On   the   cypress   trees   in   front ,   water   cranes   nestle   amongst   the   green ,   Every   summer   and   winter   solstice   come   villagers   to   pay   respect   to   their   heroes .
Next   to   the   Master ' s   shrine   is   another   that   enshrines   his   premier ,   Posterity   worship   both   the   master   and   the   premier   and   hold   them   in   high   esteem .
In   my   old   age   I ' ve   come   to   a   serene   life   appreciate ,   Letting   slide   all   worldly   matters ,   leaving   them   far   behind .
I ' ve   searched   my   soul   and   discovered   no   competent   propositions   to   contribute ,   It ' d   be   best   if   I   return   with   my   lack   of   knowledge   to   the   woods   where   I ' m   used   to   reside .
Breezes   through   pines   would   the   belt   around   my   robe   untie ,   In   the   mountains   under   the   moon   I ' d   play   my   cittern   in   the   still   of   night .
If   you   wish   to   the   essence   of   my   predilection   comprehend ,   I   pray   you   listen   attentively   to   the   singing   of   fishermen   along   the   riverside .
I   shall   make   no   more   submissions   to   the   Palace   in   the   north ,   I   should   return   south   to   the   Zhongnan   Mountains   to   my   humble   retreat .
Forsaken   by   our   wise   emperor   is   my   mediocrity ,   My   sickliness   has   acquaintances   their   distance   keep .
My   greying   hair   hastens   the   onset   of   old   age ,   Just   as   spring   comes   along   to   edge   away   the   wintry   remains   of   a   year .
Forever   holding   a   regret   makes   a   good   night ' s   sleep   hard   to   acquire ,   Moonshine   filters   through   pines   and   windows   dispersing   feeble   gleams .
Bugles   blare   in   the   evening   from   the   tower   of   the   Town   of   Wheelbase ,   Down   come   the   flags   and   their   tassels   north   of   Wheelbase .
A   summons   to   arms   was   received   last   night   from   Quli ,   The   Hun   chieftain   has   amassed   troops   on   the   Golden   Mountains '   west .
Looking   to   the   west   from   the   watch   tower ,   there   is   only   smoke   and   dust   in   the   dark ,   Yet   our   Han   corps   are   stationed   at   Wheelbase ' s   north .
The   general   intends   to   fly   the   flag   and   banners   and   westwards   charge ,   At   daybreak   the   sound   of   whistles   shall   begin   the   great   march .
From   all   sides   war   drums   bellow   billowing   a   sea   of   cloud ,   All   corps   sing   military   songs   to   even   the   Yin   Mountains   shake .
Over   the   Hun   territory   where   their   soldiers   gather ,   clouds   seem   to   accumulate ,   Entangled   in   grass   roots   are   white   bones   suggesting   where   battles   once   took   place .
Near   the   Sword   River   blow   gusty   winds   and   drifts   snow   far   and   wide ,   Off   freezes   the   stony   Sand   Corridor ,   not   even   horse   hoofs   could   get   by .
For   the   emperor ,   the   general   willingly   all   hardship   and   difficulties   undertakes ,   Vowing   to   settle   the   dust   at   the   borders   to   repay   His   Majesty ' s   grace .
Throughout   time ,   who   could   forget   those   who   history   takes   note   of ?   His   achievement   to   date   surely   leaves   that   of   many   ancients   in   his   wake .
I   have   long   hoped   to   retreat   to   somewhere   in   the   woods ,   Yet   I   have   not   the   means   to   even   a   clearing   for   a   couple   of   paths   make .
It   is   not   my   intent   to   stay   here   in   the   north ,   I   often   think   of   you ,   Master ,   and   company   in   the   eastern   state .
To   survive   here   consumes   gold   at   the   rate   of   firewood ,   In   chasing   ideals   I   have   my   youth   year   after   year   chased   away .
Sitting   along   surrounded   by   bamboo   clusters ,   I   play   the   lyre ,   recite   poems   and   versify   some   more ;
Orioles   warble   and   swallows   coo   heralding   another   new   year ,   Horse   Town   and   Yardang   to   the   north   and   west   are   thousands   of   miles   from   here .
As   I   reside   within   a   heavily   walled   estate   next   to   what   used   to   be   the   royal   gardens   of   Han ,   How   I   wish   my   heart   could   fly   like   the   moon   and   Hun   skies   reach .
I   could   only   stitch   cryptic   verses   of   grief   on   piece   after   piece   of   embroidery ,   Upstairs   blossoms   have   blossoms   for   company   teasing   how   alone   I   sleep .
May   I   ask   the   triumphant   General   Dou   of   Han ,   When   shall   there   be   a   victorious   return   like   the   legend   inscribed   on   the   Yanran   stele ?
I   recline   in   the   woods   worrying   the   passing   of   spring ,   I   leave   the   window   open   to   gather   the   sight   of   golden   hours .
In   a   trance   comes   the   Bluebird ,   the   celestial   envoy ,   Inviting   me   to   the   abode   of   Red   Pine ,   the   legend   who   could   rain   bring   about .
His   furnace   has   just   been   turn   on   burning   bright ,   We   are   surrounded   by   blossoms   of   heavenly   peach   trees   outside .
If   youth   could   ever   be   held   to   last ,   Why   the   need   to   hold   dear   the   heavenly   wine   in   the   name   of   Rosy   Clouds ?
I   am   a   traveller   roving   by   the   green   mountains ,   I   sail   my   boat   to   the   fresh   waters   before   my   eyes .   Wide   apart   are   the   shores   at   high   tide ,   One   full   sail   is   all   the   boat   requires   in   the   wind   that   is   just   right .
How   could   I   have   delivered   a   letter   for   home ?   Could   you   drop   a   letter   in   Luoyang   for   me ?   I   say   to   the   homing   geese   of   the   wild .
Oh   I   would   like   to   stone   away   the   orioles ,   So   that   they   can ' t   perch   and   chipper   on   trees .
Their   twitter   my   sweet   dream   disturbs ,   Preventing   me   from   reaching   my   husband   in   Liaoxi .
A   sudden   wind   caused   waves   to   surge ,   As   sunset   turned   into   dimming   skies .
Mountains   were   in   the   shade   of   night   and   it   was   time   to   return   home ,   By   the   reeds   wild   geese   rested   in   flocks   under   the   moonlight .
In   solitude   I   reminisced   about   my   time   in   the   capital ,   Then   came   toll   of   bells ,   heard   by   those   having   a   sleepless   night .
A   spectacular   tale   it   was   that   has   spread   to   chase   incense   and   ashes ,   Waters   must   run   in   the   course   of   nature   just   as   flowers   and   plants   flourish   in   spring .
At   sunset ,   birds '   warbles   tremble   in   easterlies   and   forlorn   appear ,   Petals   fall   like   the   tale   of   a   lady   who   took   a   leap ,   and   away   they   drift .
In   the   dim   moonlight   wild   geese   flew   high   in   the   sky ,   In   the   dark   fled   the   Tartar   chieftain .
The   general   was   about   to   lead   a   light   cavalry   to   chase ,   Then   came   heavy   snow   cladding   bows   and   glaives .
There   was   a   young   woman   in   her   bedchamber   who   had   not   a   thing   to   worry ,   On   a   spring   day   she   dressed   up   to   visit   a   fine   edifice .
A   sudden   glance   of   fresh   willowy   banks   on   the   wayside ,   Made   her   regret   ever   urging   her   husband   to   pursue   high   office .
A   loving   mother   busied   herself   with   needlework ,   On   clothes   for   a   son   who   was   going   away ;
How   could   the   love   of   grass   only   inches   tall ,   Ever   reciprocate   spring   after   spring   of   sunshine   day   after   day ?
Here   gathers   dew   condensing   chills   and   the   coldness   of   afterglow ,   Over   the   mountains   of   Chu   sets   the   sun   of   feeble   rays .
From   trees   that   surrounds   the   Dongting   Lake   come   howls   of   gibbons ,   As   I   here   on   a   magnolia   canoe   stay .
Over   the   vast   waters   rises   the   glowing   moon ,   There   is   spring   water   gurgling   down   those   dark   hills   in   disarray .
In   the   sky   invisible   is   the   pagan   god   of   clouds ,   Alone   I   dwell   on   the   autumnal   blues   as   I   idle   the   night   away .
Within   the   private   chambers   of   the   palace ,   ladies   have   had   their   morning   make - up   applied ,   Up   on   the   Pavilion   of   Mirage   they   pine   to   greet   the   emperor   as   he   arrives .
On   chamber   doors ,   off   the   mouths   of   gilded   casts   of   creatures   hang   cold   knocking   rings ,   In   drops   of   water   off   the   bronze   dragon   hourglass   lapses   time ,   prolonged   seems   daylight .
In   the   distance   the   screens   to   the   emperor ' s   bedchamber   are   raised ,   There   the   imperial   maids   gather   to   the   emperor ' s   bed   prepare   and   organise .
In   moments   of   idleness   your   death   grieves   me   and   I   also   myself   grieve ,   A   hundred   years   is   a   long   time   yet   how   insignificant   it   can   also   be !
Deng   You   had   to   give   up   his   son   and   he   accepted   it   as   fate ,   Pan   Yue   wrote   a   trilogy   of   elegy   lamenting   his   wife ' s   passing   away ,   all   but   verbosity   in   vain .
How   is   being   buried   together   for   reunion   in   afterlife   a   wish   that   is   other   than   vague ?   It   is   just   as   remote   to   pray   for   and   be   granted   your   hand   in   marriage   in   the   next   life   again .
What   I   do   have   is   insomnia   throughout   the   night   keeping   me   awake ,   To   compensate   for   my   inability   to   your   knitted   eyebrows   ease   in   your   living   days .
The   woods   had   darkened   and   grasses   were   aflutter   as   winds   blasted   through ,   At   night   the   general   drew   his   bow   and   took   a   shot .
The   next   morning   he   found   white   fletching   protruding   from   a   boulder ,   And   anchored   in   stone   was   his   arrowhead   and   shaft .
On   a   night   of   full   moon ,   on   which   of   the   twenty   four   bridges   are   you ,   A   handsome   fellow ,   teaching   ladies   to   play   the   flute ?
So   fine   and   bright   is   the   day   on   the   third   of   March ,   By   the   riverside   of   Changan   gather   many   a   lady   on   a   spring   excursion .
They   are   full - figured ,   high - spirited   and   genuinely   noble ,   With   delicate   flesh   and   skin   over   an   even   bone   structure .
Glowing   in   the   twilight   of   spring   are   their   luxurious   silk   robes ,   Embroidered   with   peacocks   in   gilded   threads   and   unicorns   in   silvery   yarn .
What   adorns   their   head ? Jade   hairpins   with   decorative   flowery   pieces   that   hang   by   their   sideburns .
What   embellishes   their   rear ?   Accentuating   their   waist   are   belts   studded   with   pearls .
In   amongst   them   are   the   sisters   of   Lady   Yang ,   the   emperor ' s   queen   figure ,   Who   have   been   bestowed   grand   titles   to   their   ladyship   honour .
The   violet   camel   hump   delicacies   they   dine   on   were   prepared   in   pots   made   of   jade ,   Fresh   fish   are   presented   on   exquisite   crystal   platters .
Seemingly   full   they   hesitate   with   their   chopsticks   made   of   rhinoceros   horns ,   Yet   they   still   have   the   royal   kitchen   busily   knifing   intricate   food   sculptures .
Imperial   eunuchs   dash   to   and   fro   to   service   provide   and   dust   avoid ,   Royal   cooks   continue   without   rest   to   dish   up   classic   cuisines   containing   the   eight   rarities .
Flute   play   and   drumming   add   to   entertain   the   atmosphere   and   all   souls   invigorate ,   Of   the   numerous   guests   there ,   every   single   one   holds   an   important   post .
And   who   is   this   that   comes   late   strolling   on   an   austere   steed ?   By   the   marquee   curtains   the   rider   hops   off   onto   a   carpet   of   verdure .
Willow   flowers ,   like   snow ,   drift   and   float   over   duckweed ,   Here   comes   a   bluebird   bearing   a   piece   of   red   cloth   to   a   message   deliver .
This   is   a   man   of   cardinal   power ,   absolutely   unrivalled ,   Do   take   care   not   to   approach   too   close   and   challenge   that   temper   of   our   premier .
After   seeing   you   off   in   the   mountains ,   As   the   sun   has   set   I   shut   the   door   to   my   timber   hut ;
Next   spring   when   grass   comes   green   again ,   Would   you ,   a   nobleman ,   return   to   visit ,   I   wonder ?
A   red - turbaned   timekeeper   calls   through   the   break   of   dawn ,   The   Robe   Master   has   just   sent   in   the   jade - precious   fur   coat   soft   as   a   cloud .
Through   gates   of   layered   palatial   zones   to   the   main   palace   hall ,   Comes   ambassadors   from   many   foreign   countries   to   salute   the   crown .
Daylight   has   just   shone   on   cactus   evaporating   dew ,   Incense   from   the   royal   burner   floats ,   so   seems   the   dragon   pattern   on   the   imperial   robe .
After   morning   assembly   the   secretary   is   to   author   rainbow - coloured   imperial   edicts ,   On   his   way   to   his   office   by   the   Phoenix   Pond ,   his   jade   pendants   clatter   as   he   goes .
A   stranded   general   you   are ,   who   once   lead   a   long   march   to   the   south ,   A   commander   of   an   army   of   a   hundred   thousand   strong .
Now   dismissed   from   office   and   with   no   vocation   to   return   to ,   Despite   your   age ,   reluctant   to   leave   the   court   of   a   capable   emperor   your   heart   lingers   on .
When   you   were   in   charge ,   calm   and   at   peace   were   our   borders ,   Your   sword   knows   well   that   in   order   to   the   nation   server   you   would   give   your   life   and   all .
Such   languors   on   River   Han   pervade ,   There   you   are   brooding   in   the   sunset      where   to   from   here   on ?
It   has   been   raining   for   days   and   smoke   from   stoves   is   slow   to   rise ,   Meals   have   been   made   and   taken   to   the   fields   on   the   east .
I ' ve   been   in   the   mountains   in   search   of   tranquillity   and   admiring   hibiscus   in   the   morn ,   Eating   light   vegetarian   meals   and   picking   okra   leaves   under   pine   trees .
I ' m   now   a   man   out   of   office ,   not   competing   for   anyone ' s   seat ,   Why   do   shearwaters   doubt   my   goodwill   and   their   high   flights   keep ?
The   southerlies   of   April   comb   through   the   barley   field   of   gold ,   Jujube   trees   are   still   with   flowers   and   phoenix   trees   thick   with   leaves .
You   bid   farewell   to   blue   mountains   in   the   morning   though   you ' d   see   them   still   at   twilight ,   Outside ,   horses   neigh ,   you   think   of   your   homeland   as   you   leave .
Sir ,   how   magnanimous   and   liberal   a   man   you   are !   You   have   a   stout   face   with   awe - inspiring   eyebrows   and   a   dragon   beard .
Within   you   stores   a   library   of   ten   thousands   scrolls ,   Not   content   to   the   uncultivated   yield   your   ideals .
You   often   invited   us   to   drink   with   you ,   Worldly   matters   bother   you   not ,   for   they   are   slight   in   your   mind ;
Once   tipsy   you ' d   recline   and   sleep   caring   not   when   the   sun   had   gone   down ,   Sometimes   you ' d   just   stare   at   a   solitary   cloud   high   in   the   sky .
You ,   a   son   of   the   Zheng   region ,   probably   has   not   yet   home   arrived ,   I ,   a   traveller   from   Luoyang ,   can   only   let   out   a   sigh   of   worry .
I   hear   you   have   many   acquaintances   back   in   your   home   town ,   Being   dismissed   from   office   was   then ,   how   fare   you   now ?
February   sees   orioles   flitting   in   the   royal   garden ,   Surrounded   by   a   city   in   spring ,   mornings   inside   the   Palace   are   lively   and   vivacious .
The   bells   of   the   Ever   Joyful   Chamber   resound   far   to   where   flowers   thin   out ,   The   hues   of   willows   by   the   Dragon   Pond   deepen   and   intensify   in   the   rain .
Yet   the   the   sun ' s   warmth   dispels   not   my   regret   of   ever   coming   to   dead   ends ,   Like   the   clouds   in   the   sky ,   I ' ve   long   wished   to   serve   under   the   sun ' s   reign .
For   a   decade   I   have   been   submitting   my   prose   yet   remained   unheard ,   It   is   with   shame   that   I ,   now   an   aged   man ,   hope   to   your   honourable   mention   attain .
By   nature ,   being   above   worldly   desires   can   hardly   satisfy   needs ,   Why   bother   holding   a   grudge   and   utter   grievances   in   vain .
At   dawn   roosters   crow   here   and   there   as   if   interrupted ,   The   tree   you   are   on   is   still   green   showing   you   little   consolation .
A   low - ranking   regional   officer   like   me   roams   like   a   drifting   stem ,   Any   family   property   I   used   to   possess   have   long   become   a   waste .
I   owe   it   to   your   calls   reminding   me ,   That   I   also   have   a   family   untainted   by   desire ,   in   that   we   are   much   the   same .
We   have   been   unable   to   reunite   for   so   long ,   We   have   been   like   morning   and   evening   stars   that   never   meet   in   the   sky .
What   a   night   this   has   been ?   For   us   to   share   this   candlelight .
For   how   long   does   youth   last ?   Your   hair   has   greyed   and   so   has   mine .
Of   the   old   acquaintances   I   called   upon ,   half   of   them   have   ghosts   become ,   Aghast   and   gut - wrenched   I   cried .
All   of   a   sudden   twenty   years   have   gone   by ,   Before   I   could   again   call   on   where   you   reside .
They   courteously   greet   their   father ' s   friend ,   And   my   journey   enquire .
Before   I   could   their   curiosity   satisfy ,   You   have   you   son   bringing   out   the   wine .
We   nibble   on   spring   chives   just   gathered   in   the   evening   rain ,   In   a   fresh   meal   that   rough   grains   contain ,   abundant   is   pure   joy   as   old   friends   reunite .
You   marvel   at   how   unexpected   such   a   reunion   is ,   In   one   go   you   gulp   down   more   than   a   pint .
Pints   after ,   high   in   spirit   you   are   yet   sober   still ,   And   I   am   grateful   for   your   friendship   so   genuine .
Tomorrow   shall   find   us   separated   by   mountains   again ,   What   the   future   holds   is   vague   and   undefined .
Upon   first   impression ,   your   surname   surprises   me ,   And   your   forename   recalls   to   mind   a   familiar   face .
The   world   has   undergone   twists   and   turns   since   we ' ve   been   apart ,   Time   lapses   as   we   talk   about   the   past ,   then   comes   bell   toll   to   close   the   day .
Tomorrow   you   will   be   on   your   way   on   the   Baling   Pass ,   There   will   be   mountains   of   autumn   that   shall   us   separate .
Had   I   known   that   tides   and   currents   could   be   forecast ,   I   might   have   chosen   to   be   a   sailor ' s   wife .
On   the   other   side   of   the   window   screen ,   twilight   fainted   as   the   sun   set ,   Inside   the   gilded   chamber   where   the   emperor   no   longer   came   to   visits   her   tears   fell .
Shu ' s   Premier ,   Zhuge ' s   prestige   has   spread   as   far   and   wide   as   the   universe   is   vast ,   His   statue   exhibits   dignity   and   austerity ,   a   model   for   a   statesman   and   the   like .
He   worked   his   mind   to   achieve   scheme   after   scheme   bringing   about   a   tripartite   state ,   His   integrity   stood   the   test   of   time   like   the   precious   phoenix   soaring   in   the   sky .
On   par   was   his   achievement   with   that   of   the   statesmen   of   ancient   Shang   and   Zhou ,   Even   Xiao   and   Cao   would   fade   in   comparison   to   his   command   of   armies   in   his   stride .
The   wheel   of   fortune   inevitably   rounded   up   the   time   of   Han   ending   a   dynasty ,   Yet   he   strove   nonetheless   in   his   line   of   duty   leading   military   affairs   till   he   died .
Coincidentally   this   beautiful   zither   has   fifty   strings ,   Each   string ,   each   fret   reminds   me   of   a   year   that   has   gone   by .
Life   is   a   dream ,   mine   seems   illusory   like   those   beautiful   butterflies   in   Zhuangzi ' s   reverie ,   Once   I   loved   like   King   Hope   and   wished   to   a   cuckoo   become   to   hold   onto   springtime .
Suffering   brings   out   tears   in   the   vast   sea   that   under   the   brightest   moon   seem   like   pearls ,   Fond   memories   are   like   the   Bluefield   jade   warmed   in   the   sun   that   could   joy   volatilise .
All   emotions   have   become   the   past   held   only   in   remembrance ,   What   could   not   be   would   never   be ,   forever   gone   are   the   old   times .
By   the   time   Emperor   Xuanzong   returned   via   Mawei ,   Lady   Yang   had   bit   the   dust ,   Though   many   a   sunrise   and   new   moon   had   gone   by ,   unforgettable   was   their   love .
Yet   he   was   a   Son   of   Heaven   stately   and   resolute   after   all ,   Unlike   an   emperor   in   history   who   with   his   concubines   hid   in   the   Jingyang   palace   well .
My   old   homestead   must   have   been   overgrown   with   creeping   weeds ,   In   deep   sorrow   I   dwell   as   I   of   you   take   leave .
This   road   extends   over   and   beyond   the   icy   clouds ,   On   which   I ' ll   be   homeward   bound   in   the   snow   that   has   set   in   for   the   evening .
I   grew   up   without   a   father   and   started   travelling   early   in   life ,   I   met   you   late   in   life   having   endured   hard   luck   and   grief .
As   we   come   face   to   face   to   part ,   holding   our   sleeves   to   tears   conceal ,   When   and   where   in   this   stained   world   shall   we   again   meet ?
Behind   the   gate   the   office   tower   reflects   the   remains   of   day ,   At   the   front ,   peach   and   plum   trees   are   in   bloom ,   willow   catkins   adrift .
From   the   guarded   inner   palace   comes   faint   evening   bells ,   Audible   around   the   department   are   warbling   birds   as   traffic   of   officers   thins .
In   the   morning ,   as   you   make   your   way   towards   the   golden   hall ,   your   jade   pendant   sways ,   In   the   evening ,   you   take   your   leave   passing   the   Green   Lock   Gate   carrying   edicts .
I   would   have   liked   to   work   with   you ,   yet   I   cannot   help   being   senile ,   As   increasingly   confined   by   illness   I   am ,   unable   to   don   the   robes   of   office .
Growing   tired   of   the   burden   of   office   all   year   long ,   At   morning ' s   first   light   I   wander   out   of   town   to   ease   the   mind ;
Willows   leisurely   sway   in   the   gentle   wind ,   The   mountain   green   quells   worries   and   concerns   of   mine .
Against   some   thickets   I   rest   in   comfort ,   Along   the   creek   I   stroll   to   and   fro   taking   my   time .
A   drizzle   falls   across   the   meadow ,   Where   are   the   turtle   doves   that   I   hear   cooing ,   why   are   they   nowhere   in   sight ?
Though   longing   for   serenity   I   am   subject   to   shuffles   and   missions ,   My   pace   inevitably   hastens   when   I   have   imperial   orders   to   abide   by ;
Here   I   am   seeing   you   off   as   you   on   misty   waters   sail   away ,   My   square   of   handkerchief   is   drenched   with   overflowing   tears   as   I   wave   goodbye .
Where   have   the   flying   birds   dashed   off   to ?   Verdant   hills   range   before   me   but   no   one   comes   to   sight .
Your   lone   boat   along   the   Yangtze   sails   into   the   distance ,   The   afterglow   of   the   setting   sun   falls   on   the   five   lakes '   springtime .
I   am   an   outsider   at   a   foreign   place   alone ,   Every   occasion   of   festivity   finds   me   missing   my   family   manifold .
In   the   distance   my   brothers   must   be   making   a   climb   into   the   highlands ,   They   would   have   evodia   attached   to   their   sleeves   and   my   absence   noted .
The   moon   has   just   shown   her   face   on   a   night   with   slight   autumn   dew ,   Her   thin   robe   is   becoming   light ,   yet   for   a   change   of   clothes   she   makes   no   move .
On   her   silver   cittern   she   plays   heartily   all   evening ,   Concealing   her   dread   of   returning   to   her   lonely   room .
I   know   not   the   exact   location   of   the   Temple   of   Garnering   Incense ,   For   miles   and   miles   I ' ve   been   walking   amid   a   cloudy   fog   from   peak   to   peak .
There   is   no   sign   of   foot   traffic   but   soaring   ancient   trees ,   Whence   come   tolling   of   bells   in   the   mountains   so   remote   and   bleak ?
Spring   water   over   stones   and   rocks   of   riprap   sobs ,   Daylight   diffuses   coldness   through   pines   of   layered   green .
Yet   as   dusk   sets   in   over   this   quiet   deep   pond   in   a   labyrinth ,   Suddenly   I   am   disencumbered   of   the   creeping   serpent   and   feel   at   ease .
I   walk   pass   by   a   fair   maiden ' s   heavily   draped   window ,   Alone   on   an   autumn   night ,   prolonged   is   loneliness   of   bedtime .
The   life   of   a   goddess   of   the   Magic   Mountains   is   nothing   but   a   dream ,   Maidenhood   is   livelihood   without   a   man ,   by   clear   waters   a   lady   leads   a   simple   life .
Water   chestnuts   are   tender   and   delicate ,   yet   of   them   currents   take   no   pity ,   How   is   it   that   cinnamon   flowers   tend   to   more   fragrance   transpire   under   moonlight ?
Since   no   satisfaction   could   possibly   arise   from   my   expressing   unrequited   love ,   I   might   as   well   brood   in   melancholy   to   idly   lose   my   mind .
On   top   of   the   Phoenix   Terrace   phoenixes   used   to   roam ,   Now   gone   are   phoenixes ,   a   desolate   lookout   remains   as   the   river   continues   to   flow .
Flowers   and   verdure   of   the   Wu   Palace   are   now   buried   under   isolated   trails ,   The   upper   ranks   and   decorated   officers   of   Jin   are   now   mounds   topped   with   growth .
Floating   clouds   eventually   the   sun   conceal ,   Being   so   far   away   from   Changan   has   me   worried   in   shadow .
A   girl   of   meagre   means   knows   not   what   it ' s   like   to   beautiful   silk   brocades   wear   and   shine ,   It   only   further   saddens   her   when   she   contemplates   asking   a   matchmaker   to   a   suitor   find .
Who   can   really   appreciate   her   virtue   and   merit ?   For   she   knows   to   diligence   maintain   and   the   frivolous   avoid   in   hard   times .
Regretfully   here   she   remains   year   after   year   stitching   embroidery ,   Sewing   bridal   dresses   for   others ,   such   is   her   life .
It   is   now   morning   in   the   residence   study   where   the   cold   has   set   in ,   I   am   suddenly   reminded   of   the   outsider   who   in   the   mountains   resides ;
I   would   like   to   bring   him   a   ladle   of   wine ,   And   offer   him   some   comfort   from   afar   in   the   storm   of   night .
Yet   amid   piles   of   fallen   leaves   in   the   uninhabited   mountains ,   Where   would   I   his   whereabouts   find ?
The   general   is   a   descendant   of   Cao   Wu ,   the   Lord   of   Wei ,   But   now   you   have   been   relegated   to   the   status   of   a   commoner   of   little   means   and   ways .
Gone   are   the   days   of   heroic   vigour   of   your   antecedents !   Yet   there   remain   with   you   literary   talent ,   certain   elegance   and   grace .
At   first   he   studied   up   on   the   calligraphic   style   of   Lady   Wei   of   Jin   dynasty ,   Only   to   realise   you   would   never   surpass   what   Wang   Xizhi   had   achieved .
Then   you   turned   to   painting   and   lost   yourself   in   it   as   years   pass   you   by ,   Meaning   nothing   more   than   floating   clouds   are   worldly   wealth   and   prestige .
During   the   Kaiyuan   years   you   were   often   summoned   into   the   palace ,   You   were   graced   many   times   and   granted   presence   in   the   Southern   Main   Hall .
The   painting   of   Great   Statesmen   in   the   Pavilion   of   Billowing   Smoke   had   faded   over   time ,   It   came   alive   again   with   your   creative   and   animated   brush   strokes .
Virtuous   premiers   were   each   adorned   with   a   honour   crest ,   Fierce   generals   had   by   their   waist   giant   bows   and   feathered   arrows .
Even   the   hair   and   beards   of   honoured   masters   were   vividly   painted ,   Bearing   themselves   ready   for   a   challenge   with   courage   in   a   glow .
The   late   Xuanzong   had   a   heavenly   steed ,   a   stallion   named   Jade   Flower ,   Many   artists   have   depicted   it   giving   different   renditions   but   none   its   verve   recorded .
That   day   it   was   led   along   to   the   front   steps   to   the   Great   Hall ,   It   stood   tall   by   the   gate ,   energetic   and   strong .
The   late   emperor   ordered   the   general   to   portray   it   on   a   silk   canvas ,   Quietly   you   let   your   craftsmanship   work   its   role ;
Soon   enlivened   were   the   dragon   of   heaven ,   Dashing   through   to   make   slight   of   all   ordinary   horses   ever   born .
This   painting   of   Jade   Flower   hung   by   the   emperor ' s   couch ,   A   veracious   comparison   to   its   real   self   standing   in   front   of   the   Hall ;
His   Majesty   smilingly   ordered   for   an   award   of   gold ,   Leaving   stable   officers   and   keepers   feeling   rather   dejected   and   despondent .
The   general   had   a   disciple   when   he   was   young ,   Who   could   also   paint   horses   and   their   various   appearance ;
Yet   he   painted   only   their   exterior   but   not   their   essence ,   Delivering   portrayals   of   thoroughbreds   with   withered   spirit .
The   general   paints   well   expressing   such   imagination ,   Occasionally   you   would   also   draw   portraits   for   gentlemen ;
In   this   day   and   age   in   the   tumult   of   war   you   wander ,   While   on   the   road   you ' d   draw   for   fellow   wayfarers .
At   the   end   of   your   tether   you   have   come   to   suffer   disdainful   looks   and   cold   shoulders ,   There   is   perhaps   no   other   artists   quite   as   down   and   out   as   yourself ;
It   seems   that   when   all   the   fame   and   reputation   have   faded ,   There   leaves   the   individual   to   entangle   in   poverty   and   distress .
As   I   am   not   yet   familiar   with   my   parents - in - law ' s   culinary   likings ,   I   shall   ask   my   sister - in - law   to   savour   first .
Yellowed   and   shrivelled   leaves   fall   adrift   here   in   a   desolate   border   town ,   Determined   to   leave   your   hometown ,   here   you   are   saying   goodbye .
On   this   day   of   gusty   winds   you   are   about   to   board   a   ferry   bound   for   Hanyang ,   By   the   time   the   sun   had   risen ,   you   will   the   Yingmen   Mountains   sight .
How   many   now   remains   here   on   the   upriver ?   Hope   your   lone   boat   that   is   about   to   sail   a   world   away   would   return   sometime .
When   shall   we   see   each   other   again ,   wonder   I ?   Hoping   to   parting   sorrows   comfort ,   let   us   drink   up   a   chalice   of   wine .
The   setting   sun   fell   on   the   countryside ,   Time   for   cattle   and   sheep   to   return   to   shabby   alleyways .
The   old   in   anticipation   of   shepherd   boys '   return ,   Leaned   against   gates   of   twined   twigs   supported   by   their   canes .
Pheasants   crowed   and   wheat   fields   flourished ,   Silkworms   into   slumbers   fell   as   mulberry   trees   thin   on   leaves   became .
There   came   farmers   carrying   hoes   on   their   shoulders ,   Reluctant   to   home   retire   just   yet ,   they   leisurely   chatted   away .
In   admiration   of   farm   life ' s   peacefulness   that   I   had   seen ,   Disillusioned   about   office ,   I   recited   from   the   Book   of   Songs   to   Nature   embrace .
Last   night   here   the   Emperor   a   Toaist   priestess   conferred ,   A   smiling   Lady   Yang   Reverend   True   Faith   became   only   to   her   veil   remove .
Impulse   drove   the   Sui   Emperor   to   tour   the   south   and   national   welfare   disdain ,   He   would   not   hear   of   what   his   Court   had   to   remonstrate   against .
Brocades   made   by   women   of   the   empire   in   spring   breezes   flutter ,   Half   of   them   as   saddle   cloth   for   imperial   horses   and   the   other   half   as   sails .
I   have   long   been   restrained   by   the   attire   of   office ,   An   exile   to   a   remote   southern   state   comes   as   a   blessing   in   disguise .
I ' d   spend   my   spare   time   with   neighbouring   farmers   and   growers ,   Into   the   mountains   and   woods   I ' d   wander   sometimes .
At   dawn   I   till   the   land   and   tend   to   dewy   weeds ,   I   pole   my   own   boat   striking   stones   in   the   creek   at   night .
Where   I   live   is   out   of   people ' s   way ,   Allowing   me   to   sing   on   and   on   to   the   blue   southern   skies .
Lady   Yang ' s   married   sister   was   summoned   by   the   Emperor   to   the   palace   hall ,   She   crossed   the   Palace   Gateway   on   horseback   at   dawn .
With   a   dislike   for   powders   that   could   her   natural   colour   stain ,   She   had   merely   touched   up   her   brows   lightly   to   the   Emperor   come   before .
We   walk   alongside   in   our   approach   towards   the   imperial   court ,   Filed   in   different   divisions ,   we   are   separated   by   those   in   the   middle   from   State   Affairs .
In   the   morning   we   follow   the   royal   guards   to   the   emperor ' s   court   enter ,   In   the   evening   we   return   home   smothered   in   royal   incense .
Feeling   sorry   for   blossoms   that   are   falling   adrift   is   a   greybeard ,   Towards   the   high - flying   bird   who   soars   to   its   eminence ,   there   is   envy .
In   times   of   peace   little   is   presented   for   review ,   There   appears   to   be   far   fewer   submissions   calling   for   remonstration   and   introspection .
A   candle   flame   flickers   against   a   dull   painted   screen   on   an   cool   autumn   night ,   She   holds   a   small   silk   fan   to   flap   away   dashing   fireflies .
Above   her   hang   celestial   bodies   as   frigid   as   deep   water ,   She   sat   there   watching   Altair   of   Aquila   and   Vega   of   Lyra   pining   for   each   other   in   the   sky .
Ever   since   our   empire ' s   establishment ,   of   artists   who   paint   horses ,   The   late   Duke   of   River   City   would   irrefutably   be   the   most   ingenious .
Over   the   past   thirty   years ,   General   Cao   holds   similar   fame ,   Enabling   us   mortals   to   again   admire   the   verve   of   great   steeds .
He   once   painted   Night   Lightning ,   Xuanzong ' s   courser ,   So   realistic   was   his   painting   that   for   ten   days   lightning   struck   over   the   Dragon   Pond .
A   plate   made   of   crimson   agate   from   the   treasure   vault   was   bestowed   upon   him ,   Retrieved   by   a   bedchamber   maid   on   the   imperial   concubine ' s   order .
General   Cao   acknowledged   the   award   with   a   dance   before   returning   with   it ,   From   there   on   many   visited   him   for   a   painting   and   came   prepared   with   scrolls   of   silk ;
Royal   relatives   and   the   influential   have   been   keen   to   his   works   obtain ,   Thinking   his   works   could   decorative   screens   become   at   home   and   brilliance   bring .
There   is   a   drawing   bearing   resemblance   to   Taizong ' s   steed   with   mane   of   ochre ,   And   to   contemporary   General   Guo ' s   lion - head   courser .
In   this   new   painting   he   showcases   these   two   horses ,   Inspiring   awe   in   those   who   have   come   to   them   adore .
Both   are   coursers   that   could   fend   off   ten   thousand   opponents ,   Though   captured   on   fabric ,   unrestrained   is   their   vigour   that   could   ride   out   a   storm .
The   other   seven   steeds   on   the   painting   are   also   extraordinary ,   Galloping   in   the   freezing   air   smoky   with   snow   with   a   remarkable   flair ;
Leaving   a   series   of   hoof   marks   in   snow   along   the   catalpa - lined   path ,   Where   stable   officers   and   boys   are   on   standby   at   their   service .
Adorable   are   these   nine   steeds ,   each   eager   to   show   their   animated   vitality ,   Looking   after   one   another   with   steady   and   noble   integrity .
I   wonder   who   really   loves   them   with   painstaking   zeal ?   Nowadays   there   is   Wei   Feng   where   once   there   was   Zhi   Dun   the   zealot .
I   recall   when   the   former   emperor   toured   towards   the   Summer   Palace   of   the   New   Great ,   As   the   parade   progressed   towards   the   east ,   in   the   sky   banners   undulated ;
About   thirty   thousand   horses   trotted   and   galloped   elegantly ,   All   as   spirited   as   the   ones   depicted   in   this   painting .
Ever   since   the   passing   away   of   Xuanzong ,   There   hasn ' t   been   any   more   gallantry   like   river   dragon   slaying .
Do   you   not   see ,   In   the   cypress   and   pine   woods   of   the   Mount   of   Golden   Grains ,   Never   seen   again   are   coursers   except   for   birds   crying   in   the   wind   in   vain .
A   bright   moon   rises   over   the   sea ,   Wherever   we   are ,   in   different   far   corners ,   we   the   same   moon   share   at   the   same   time .
The   tender - hearted   complain   of   how   night - time   stretches   on ,   Inevitably   giving   rise   to   sentiments   of   yearning   throughout   the   night .
Seeing   as   the   moonlight   is   so   lovely   I   put   out   candlelight ,   And   put   on   a   robe   to   sustain   the   chill   of   a   dewy   kind .
Regretfully   I   could   not   hold   on   to   this   so   as   to   offer   you   the   scene ,   I   should   turn   in ,   and   perhaps   dream   of   a   rendezvous   I   might .
Before   me   is   a   reddened   wood   of   rustling   maple   leaves ,   Here   on   a   pavilion   I   have   with   me   a   pint   of   wine   enjoying   my   ease .
Towards   the   Taihua   Peak   float   clouds   caught   by   the   remains   of   the   afterglow ,   Rain   begins   to   fall   sparsely   over   the   Central   Peak .
As   mountains   range   away   their   hues   fade ,   the   atmosphere   vary   the   colour   of   trees .
The   bellow   of   the   Yellow   River   resonates   as   it   rushes   towards   the   sea ,   Tomorrow   I   shall   arrive   at   the   capital   of   our   empire ,   Yet   I   still   of   the   life   of   a   angler   or   a   woodsman   dream .
The   stairs   are   rendered   marble - like   as   dew   condensates ,   Deep   into   the   night   through   her   stockings   chills   penetrate .
She   lets   down   the   crystalline   curtain ,   And   through   the   delicate   veil   she   continues   to   the   autumn   moon   gaze .
The   sound   of   bugle   fades   in   the   skies   of   high   autumn ,   Standing   guard   on   the   watch   tower   are   relaxed   soldiers .
Breezes   brush   through   the   one   and   only   green   mound ,   The   white - hot   sun   sets   over   the   remoteness   of   Liangzhou .
The   Great   Desert   hasn ' t   seen   war   nor   action   of   late ,   The   isolated   borders   now   see   travellers   come   and   go .
Let   us   hope   that   the   Hun ' s   submission   is   like   this   river ,   Forever   willing   to   southwards   flow .
They   say   those   garrisoning   outside   the   Town   of   Yellow   Dragon ,   Haven ' t   been   allowed   off   duty   for   years   in   recent   time .
Ruthless   is   the   moon   which   they   once   saw   from   their   bedchamber ,   Here   over   the   barracks   of   Han   the   same   moon   shines .
Their   young   wives   for   their   spouse   yearn ,   In   much   the   same   way   these   young   men   did   last   night .
Although   winning   the   emperor ' s   favour   is   not   entirely   based   on   looks ,   How   should   I   primp   and   preen   to   on   my   appearance   rely ?
Days   are   warm   and   breezy ,   birds   softly   chirp ,   Shadows   of   flowers   overlay   under   the   sun   that   rises   high .
I   am   reminded   of   those   girls   who   spend   year   after   year   in   the   Yue   creek ,   Remembering   the   picking   of   lotus   flowers   and   good   old   times .
The   mountains   appear   uninhabited   with   not   a   person   in   sight ,   Yet   I   hear   people   talking .
Light   reflects   and   penetrates   deep   into   the   woods ,   Shining   on   once   shady   moist   moss .
She   told   of   a   good   lineage ,   But   had   fallen   to   the   grass   roots ,   and   on   no   one   could   she   rely .
Within   the   Great   Wall   once   disorder   raged ,   All   her   brothers   were   massacred   and   family   victimised .
What   of   the   power   and   the   glory   of   office   so   high ?   When   in   the   turmoil   of   war   they   couldn ' t   even   remains   find .
The   fickle   and   shrewd   of   the   world   loathed   the   down   and   out ,   Everything   could   change   just   like   a   candle   in   the   wind   might .
She   was   married   to   a   philanderer ,   He   cast   her   aside   and   took   another   beauty   as   his   other   wife .
Mimosa   furls   tight   in   the   dark ,   Mandarin   ducks   do   not   sleep   alone   at   night .
Yet   her   husband   only   attended   to   smiles   of   new   company ,   Never   did   he   care   whether   she   would   cry .
In   the   mountains ,   spring   water   would   run   pure   and   clear ,   Off   the   mountain ,   spring   water   would   dirt   gather   and   run   vile .
She   would   send   her   maid   to   jewellery   pawn   so   as   to   life   sustain ,   And   to   their   thatched   cottage   maintain   she   put   to   use   morning   glory   vines .
When   she   flowers   picked ,   they   were   not   for   her   hair ,   She   would   however   cypress   leaves   hold ,   for   they   fidelity   signify .
She   braved   the   cold   in   her   jade - colour   light   clothing ,   Leaning   on   slender ,   tall   and   virtuous   bamboos   in   the   twilight .
Leisurely   reclining   in   the   South   Study   with   my   cousin ,   I   had   the   curtains   lifted   and   saw   the   moon   that   had   just   over   the   horizon   climb .
Yet   I   wondered   how   many   rounds   had   the   moon   waxed   and   waned ?   How   different   times   have   evolved   into   history   under   its   shine .
For   an   eloquent   man   like   you   residing   next   to   clear   waters ,   Bemoaning   in   local   melodies   you   would   been   on   such   a   night .
What   was   the   esteemed   master   aiming   for   and   focusing   on ?   That   had   you   living   a   life   of   unease   in   a   disturbing   time .
Zou   is   still   the   name   of   this   place   where   you   had   your   roots ,   What   in   the   Han   era   became   part   of   Lord   Lu ' s   estate   was   where   you   used   to   reside .
You   sighed   of   ill   fate   and   the   disappearance   of   fair   phoenixes ,   andLamented   over   poached   unicorns   and   the   compromise   of   morals   you   considered   prime .
Today   the   altar   flanked   by   columns   in   the   main   hall   are   well - tributed ,   This   should   your   dream   of   achieving   widespread   acceptance   of   your   teachings   satisfy .
Coaches   rattle   and   rumble ,   horses   neigh ,   People   in   the   march   each   has   a   bow   and   arrows   hanging   by   their   waist . Parents ,   wives   and   children   have   come   to   bid   farewell ,   Hard   to   discern   is   the   Xianyang   Bridge   behind   a   dusty   veil   that   traffic   has   raised .
They   cling   onto   leavers '   clothes ,   stomping   as   they   cry   getting   in   the   way ,   Crying   so   loudly ,   piercing   skies   and   clouds   all   the   way .
Passers - by   ask   where   they   are   marching   towards ,   These   leaving   men   reply ,    we ' ve   been   conscripted ,   it   happens   quite   often   these   days .
Some   were   deployed   to   guard   the   north   of   the   Yellow   River   when   only   fifteen ,   Then   sent   to   the   west   at   the   age   of   forty   to   land   reclaim .
Some   departed   so   young   that   neighbourhood   elders   had   helped   with   their   head   cloths ,   Even   when   it   was   time   for   their   return ,   they   still   the   borders   guarded   with   a   head   of   grey .
On   the   borders   there   has   been   such   shedding   of   blood ,   so   much   it   pools   like   a   sea ,   Yet   the   emperor ' s   desire   for   territorial   expansion   by   force   remains .
Have   you   not   heard ,   In   the   two   hundred   shires   east   of   the   Hua   Mountains ,   Thousands   of   counties   and   villages   therein   have   become   unattended ,   lying   waste ?
There   may   be   women   with   a   solid   build   ploughing   the   land ,   What   grow   in   the   fields   are   crops   in   disarray .
Then   there   are   soldiers   holding   strong   their   fort   in   the   west   battling   hard ,   No   different   to   disturbed   dogs   and   fowls   are   people   pressured   to   various   duties   pay . 
 Though   you   have   kindly   asked ,   Yet   how   dare   we   complain ?
County   clerks   are   in   a   hurry   to   taxes   collect ,   Yet   how   could   they   expect   these   demands   be   met ?
Nowadays   people   believe   having   a   boy   is   a   nightmare ,   Instead ,   having   a   girl   is   a   relief .
Girls   can   be   married   off   to   neighbours ,   Boys   only   get   drafted   to   die   on   battlefields   among   all   sorts   of   weeds . 
Do   you   not   see   over   there   by   the   Great   Salk   Lake ,   White   remains   accumulate   throughout   time ,   yet   there   is   no   one   to   dig   a   grave ?
New   lost   souls   lament   their   misery   as   old   ones   continue   their   cry ,   The   overcast   skies   seem   to   hiss   sibilant   sounds   in   the   dampness   of   rain .
A   friend   of   mine   has   prepared   a   country   feast ,   And   invited   me   to   his   village   visit   and   sightsee .
Along   the   way   there   are   clusters   of   lush   green   trees ,   Once   outside   the   town ,   there   stretch   blue   mountains   on   one   side .
The   dining   hall   has   its   doors   wide   open   towards   the   courtyard ,   We   drink   to   and   talk   about   crops ,   yield   and   farm   life .
Looking   forward   to   the   Double   Ninth   festival   we   are ,   To   again   gather   here   and   chrysanthemums   admire .
I   invited   you   to   dismount   and   have   some   wine ,   " Where   to   from   here ? "   I   enquired .
You   acknowledged   you   weren \ ' t   having   your   moment ,   To   the   foot   of   the   Zhongnan   Mountains   you   wished   to   retire .
Off   you   went   and   I   asked   no   further ,   I   knew   you \ ' d   find   in   observing   white   clouds   everlasting   delight .
Over   Changan   fly   ominous   white - head   crows ,   Crowing   at   night   on   the   southern   city   gate ;
They ' d   dash   through   noblemen ' s   residences   peckish   for   food ,   Under   those   roofs ,   all   aristocrats   have   left   town   to   get   out   of   Hun ' s   way .
The   imperial   coach   has   fled ,   breaking   the   golden   whip   and   drove   to   death   his   nine   steeds ,   He   could   not   even   all   his   offspring   take .
I   saw   an   aristocrat   with   a   semi - round   green   coral   pendant   hanging   off   his   waist ,   He   was   crying   pitifully   in   a   corner   by   a   roadway .
When   I   asked   for   his   name ,   he   would   not   give   it ,   He   only   said   he   was   down   and   out ,   ready   to   beg   and   be   enslaved .
For   over   a   hundred   days   he   had   been   hiding   in   thorny   bushes ,   Leaving   him   not   a   patch   of   skin   and   flesh   unscathed .
Descendants   of   the   dynasty - establishing   emperor   all   have   a   full   and   pronounced   nose   tip ,   The   descendants   of   imperial   dragons   are   different   to   commoners   by   nature .
Jackals   have   come   to   our   capital   invade   driving   away   our   dragon   into   the   wild ,   An   aristocrat   like   him   should   take   care   of   his   priceless   self   and   status .
I   dared   not   speak   much   at   the   crossroads ,   But   for   a   while   with   him   I   stayed .
The   easterlies   came   through   the   night   before   with   air   reeking   with   blood ,   Many   camels   have   come   from   the   east   to   what   used   to   be   the   capital   of   our   state .
General   Gesu ' s   army   used   to   be   well   trained ,   Yet   what   happened   to   their   fierceness   that   seems   so   feeble   nowadays ?
Rumour   has   it   the   emperor   had   passed   on   his   crown   to   his   son ,   Who   has   persuaded   a   couple   of   northern   chieftains .
Carving   his   face   a   chieftain   did   vowing   to   help   us   revenge ,   Then   I   cautioned   the   aristocrat   from   letting   on   such   intelligence   for   his   own   safety .
Oh ,   dear   nobleman ,   neglect   not   your   well - being ,   Long   live   the   spirit   of   your   forefathers   in   the   mausoleum   that   five   imperial   tombs   contain .
Although   where   you   have   migrated   to   is   only   on   the   outskirts   of   town ,   To   access   one   must   cut   through   a   field   of   unruly   hemp   and   mulberry   trees .
By   your   fence   are   newly   planted   hedges   of   chrysanthemums ,   Autumn   that   has   just   arrived   is   not   their   blooming   season .
I   knock   on   the   door   and   hear   not   even   a   dog   bark ,   I   turn   to   ask   your   neighbour   about   where   you   could   be .
Into   the   mountains   you   have   gone ,   said   he .   Day   after   day   returning   at   sunset   you   seem   to   be .
In   the   Grand   Hall ,   Han   Emperor   Wen   received   exiled   officers   in   search   of   sages ,   Of   them   young   Officer   Jia ' s   scholarship   and   wisdom   was   unparalleled .
Emperor   Wen   with   modesty   gave   a   night   audience   to   the   learned   gentleman ,   Yet   the   emperor   asked   not   about   his   people   but   the   supernatural .
A   serve   of   spirit   in   a   golden   chalice   has   a   price   of   ten   thousand   pence ,   And   ten   times   more   for   delicacies   dished   out   on   a   platter   made   of   jade .
Yet   in   the   face   of   such   a   feast   I   could   not   bring   myself   to   taste ,   With   wrath   I   draw   my   sword   and   I   look   around ,   feeling   completely   at   a   loss .
Frozen   over   the   Yellow   River   has   when   I   wish   to   it   cross ,   Enshrouded   in   snow   is   the   sky   when   I   wish   to   the   Taihang   Mountains   climb .
In   a   pristine   creek   I   angle ,   idling   away   my   time ,   Suddenly   on   board   a   boat   I   seem   to   be ,   dreaming   my   way   to   the   capital   am   I .
What   a   trying   journey !   Such   a   trying   journey !   So   full   of   forked   paths   before ,   now   where   are   the   ways ?
There   shall   come   a   day   with   gusty   winds   to   help   cleave   through   the   waves ,   For   me   to   make   full   sail   and   an   open   boundless   sea   navigate .
The   queen   of   flowers   and   all   forsaking   beauty   are   befitting   company   of   jollity ,   That   often   has   the   smiling   Emperor   happily   look   on .
Released   into   infinite   spring   breezes   are   his   countless   worries ,   Together   they   recline   against   the   northern   balustrade   of   the   Aloewood   Pavilion .
I ' ve   come   to   visit   the   terrace   that   has   fallen   into   a   desolate   state ,   On   this   autumn   day ,   homesick   I   feel   as   I   into   the   distance   gaze .
The   ancient   fortress   still   glows   in   the   setting   sun ,   In   the   hollowing   woods   tolling   of   bells   echoes   in   the   cold   and   resonates .
Deep   into   the   night   the   moon   on   half   a   cottage   shines ,   Across   the   sky   the   Big   Dipper   lies   and   the   Little   Dipper   tilts   an   incline .
Howls   of   gibbons   from   darkness - obscured   mountains   grieves   me ,   As   the   cold   and   gloomy   river   gushes   away   in   the   night .
The   wind   rustles   leaves   on   shores ,   The   moon   on   one   lone   boat   shines .
The   land   of   Jiande   is   not   my   native   soil ,   Old   friends   from   Weiyang   are   the   ones   on   my   mind .
I   should   perhaps   gather   these   tears   rolling   down   my   cheeks ,   And   send   them   to   my   friends   at   the   head   of   Haisi ,   the   watery   shire .
Unexpectedly   comes   an   imperial   edict   to   my   service   employ ,   As   turns   in   life   are   unpredictable ,   it   is   easier   to   follow   the   spirits   of   idle   gents .
Over   the   river   a   bright   moon   hangs   and   wiled   geese   fly ,   Here   south   of   River   Huai   and   in   the   mountains   of   Chu   trees   have   begun   to   leaves   shed .
Though   a   vagabond ,   fortunately   I   have   been   able   to   retreat   to   waters '   edge   in   Cangzhou ,   So   that   I   could   pity   my   own   reflection   to   see   grey   hair   spreading   all   over   my   head .
In   my   senile   state   that   most   would   rather   turn   their   back   on ,   I ' m   grateful   for   your   concern   for   my   onward   journey   in   your   farewells .
Back   in   Fuzhou ,   at   tonight ' s   moon ,   Alone   in   her   chamber   gazes   my   wife .
My   wife   may   have   gathered   mist   in   her   hair   as   she   by   the   window   yearn ,   Her   arms   may   feel   the   cold   of   moonshine .
I   wonder   when   we   shall   be   together   again   to   the   window   curtains   lean   against ,   To   let   the   moon   shine   on   our   tears   till   their   trails   are   dry .
Feeling   dispirited   today   I   think   of   you ,   my   friend   in   Yueyang ,   How   I   struggle   and   wish   I   could   fly   towards   you ,   yet   bed - ridden   I   am .
My   esteemed   friend ,   separated   by   waters   and   waters   of   autumn   we   are ,   Relaxing   your   feet   in   Lake   Dongting   you   must   be ,   looking   out   at   the   neglected   and   barren .
Deep   in   the   sky ,   in   daylight   and   under   moonshine ,   flights   of   wild   geese   pass   me   by ,   Green   maple   leaves   have   begin   to   redden ,   frosty   is   the   atmosphere .
In   the   heavenly   court   all   dignitaries   congregate   around   their   true   north ,   Riding   on   the   back   of   a   unicorn   or   a   phoenix   on   an   amble .
There   the   banners   embroidered   with   hibiscus   tremble   in   mistiness ,   Casting   inverted   images   in   the   waters   where   flow   together   the   Xiao   and   Xiang .
In   the   starry   palace ,   the   worthy   have   inebriated   become   on   fine   wine ,   Not   around   are   winged   sages   who   are   rare   to   forgather .
Yesterday   I   seemed   to   recall   hearing   about   the   Red   Cypress   Wiseman ,   Who   I ' m   afraid   is   no   other   than   Zhang   Liang   of   Han ;
He   followed   the   Liu   family   and   helped   establishing   the   capital   in   Changan ,   Though   he   could   still   an   army   command ,   he ' d   find   current   affairs   extremely   demanding .
How   dare   I   comment   on   the   rise   and   fall   of   our   nation ?   Shunning   the   grim   and   grime ,   some   would   rather   dine   on   maple   fragrance .
The   great   historian   of   Han   would   rather   in   Luoyang   lingered ,   a   decision   pitied   by   all ,   The   appearance   of   the   Southern   Stars   suggest   the   arrival   of   longevity   and   affluence .
My   esteemed   friend ,   why   do   you   by   the   autumn   waters   remain ?   How   you   should   be   called   to   the   emperor ' s   aid   and   enter   the   Hall   of   the   the   Great .
Fine   red   wine   glitters   in   a   jade   chalice   that   glows   in   the   night ,   Before   I   could   drink   it   come   lyre   notes   giving   orders   to   mount   the   horse .
Laugh   not ,   I   pray   you ,   at   my   tipsiness   that   may   see   me   fall   drunk   on   the   battlefield ,   For   how   many   have   been   able   to   return   in   the   history   of   war ?
Under   pine   trees   I   asked   a   pupil   of   your   whereabouts ,   Who   mentioned   his   master   has   gone   to   gather   herbs .
Somewhere   in   the   mountain   you   were   for   certain ,   Uncertain   was   where   among   the   deep   cloud   cover   you   were .
In   August   Lake   Dongting   is   a   picture   of   calm ,   At   the   horizon   its   edge   meets   the   sky   and   its   vast   waters   the   heaven   reflect   and   imitate .
I   wish   to   row   towards   her   but   have   no   boat   nor   oars ,   Conscious - stricken   towards   His   Majesty   I   am   as   I   could   only   idle   myself   away .
I   sit   down   to   watch   fishermen   angle ,   Abiding   by   what   fate   has   dealt   me ,   I   envy   them   as   they   fish   gain .
 You   arrived   in   Changan   from   the   east ,   You   had   on   you   still   Baling ' s   spring   rain .
Under   a   moist   and   darkened   sky   it   is   time   for   flowers   to   bloom ,   And   for   fledgling   young   swallows   to   take   to   the   sky   and   plane .
It   seems   only   yesterday   when   we   parted ,   now   spring   is   around ,   How   time   has   passed ,   how   many   more   strands   of   hair   on   your   temples   have   turned   grey ?
They   vowed   to   give   it   all   to   all   Hun   invaders   expel ,   All   five   thousand   officers   and   soldiers   perished ,   in   a   foreign   desert   they   fell .
Let   there   be   mercy   on   their   forsaken   remains   by   the   Wandering   River ,   Whose   wives   in   their   boudoirs   still   dream   of   a   return   of   their   men .
You   said   you ' d   come   again   yet   hollow   were   your   words   and   for   good   you   were   gone ,   The   moon   had   inclined   its   way   over   the   chamber   when   there   came   the   gong   before   dawn .
I   woke   up   from   dreaming   of   bidding   you   farewell   in   tears   as   you   left   without   hesitation ,   I   rose   with   an   urge   to   write   you   a   letter   with   ink   that   was   dull   wanting   chroma .
Candlelight   illuminates   only   half   of   the   screen   inlaid   with   jade   and   gold ,   From   within   the   hibiscus   draperies   diffuses   incense   of   musky   aroma .
There   are   those   who   loath   the   remoteness   of   the   Immortal   Mountains ,   Yet   my   separation   from   you   feels   further   away   by   ten - thousand - fold .
You   asked   when   I   shall   return ,   that   I   have   no   idea ,   At   night   in   the   Ba   Mountains   rain   fills   a   pond   of   autumn   over   the   brim .
I   wonder   when   we   could   in   your   west   chamber   a   candle   share   and   its   wick   trim ,   For   me   to   recount   to   you   my   thoughts   on   these   rainy   nights   in   the   Ba   hills .
In   the   time   of   full   bloom ,   kept   tightly   shut   were   palatial   court   gates ,   Two   lovely   faces   within   the   court   gathered   by   the   resplendent   hallway .
Though   eager   to   complain   of   palace   life ,   on   second   thought   from   it   they   refrained ,   In   case   there   was   a   parrot   that   might   catch   what   they   say .
An   awe - inspiring   general   who   used   vulture   feather   fletching   and   golden   arrowheads ,   Whose   army   flew   embroidered   battle   flags   with   a   tail   like   that   of   a   swallow .
The   general   stood   tall   to   a   new   order   provide ,   In   unity   an   army   of   thousands   of   squads   gave   roars .
Su   Wu   accepted   his   role   as   an   ambassador   of   Han   betting   on   his   life ,   Feeling   at   a   loss ,   here   in   front   of   a   shrine   in   his   name   flanked   by   lofty   trees   stand   I .
When   he   was   under   the   Hun   skies   and   moon   at   clouds '   edge   where   no   wild   geese   flew ,   In   the   far   north   he   rose   to   herd   his   sheep   and   rested   in   his   yurt   to   the   wild   survive .
By   the   time   of   his   return   all   had   changed ,   gone   was   the   decorated   alter   offering   blessing ,   When   he   left ,   he   was   merely   twenty   donning   a   crest   and   a   sword   by   his   side .
Regretfully   it   wasn ' t   Emperor   Wu   who   bestowed   him   the   lordship   seal ,   Over   a   river   of   autumn   waters   that   shall   never   return   like   time   he   cried .
At   the   break   of   dawn   I   wandered   in   the   ruins   of   an   ancient   temple ,   On   lofty   trees   of   the   woods   the   morning   sun   cast   its   rays .
Following   a   path   amongst   bamboos   I   came   to   a   secluded   place ,   Hidden   deep   amidst   lush   flowery   vegetation ,   it   used   to   be   a   chamber   for   meditation .
Birds   by   nature   took   delight   in   mountain   scenes ,   In   the   pond ,   a   mind   cleansed   by   the   waters   a   lucid   reflection   made .
Everything   gave   way   to   silence   right   there   and   then ,   Save   for   the   tolling   of   bells   that   resonates .
Rain   and   the   winds   have   come   to   a   stop   on   the   plains   along   River   Ba ,   In   the   evening ,   across   the   sky   dash   flights   of   wild   geese .
On   this   land   foreign   to   me ,   trees   are   shedding   their   leaves ,   In   the   still   of   night ,   there   is   only   a   lamp   in   the   cold   to   accompany   me .
In   the   quiet   courtyard ,   shiny   dewdrops   drip ,   I   have   a   rural   monk   for   a   neighbour   over   a   partition   that   stands   free .
I   have   for   so   long   retreated   behind   a   simple   door   in   the   countryside ,   What   passageway   could   there   remain   to   improve   my   lineage ?
You   arrived   from   far   overseas   as   if   you   flew   over   skies ,   Now   you ' re   setting   off   with   the   teachings   of   Buddha ,   as   if   to   the   worldly   take   leave .
The   waters   shall   the   moon   reflect   while   you   in   quietude   spirituality   contemplate ,   Even   fish   and   sea   monsters   would   come   near   to   Buddhist   chanting   take   heed .
No   doubt   you   would   hold   dear   the   beacon   of   bodhi ,   Bringing   light   to   the   eyes   of   those   at   the   other   end   of   the   ten   thousand   leagues .
Beauty   was   held   dear   by   the   world ,   How   could   Xishi   servile   remain ?
One   morning   she   was   a   silk   washer   in   a   Yue   creek ,   By   evening   into   Wu ' s   palace   she   was   received   and   a   concubine   became .
In   her   lowly   days   how   was   she   different   from   her   peers ? Now   Her   Highness   for   her   rare   beauty   came   to   fame .
To   powder   her   face   she   called   on   maids ,   To   put   on   robes   she   never   had   to   a   finger   raise .
Lord   Wu ' s   affection   for   her   added   to   her   charm ,   Around   her   he   saw   no   reason   why   he   would   ever   fail .
Women   who   once   waded   with   her   in   the   creek ,   Could   not   ride   with   her   in   her   carriage   of   the   State .
Let   this   be   a   note   to   girls   of   her   neighbourhood ,   They   might   her   angina   fake   but   how   could   they   ever   her   beauty   imitate ?
The   palace   surrounded   by   elegant   springs   is   basked   in   fogged   twilight ,   Emperor   Yang   of   Sui   had   wanted   to   located   his   capital   in   the   City   of   Wu .
Yet   the   fate   of   the   imperial   seal   deserted   him   for   one   with   a   distinct   forehead ,   He   could   have   sailed   the   world   on   his   splendid   fleet   had   he   not   led   his   country   to   ruin .
There   are   no   more   fireflies   from   decaying   grass   piles   to   brighten   his   dark   path   forward ,   In   the   evening ,   on   surviving   willow   trees   from   his   days   rest   ravens   as   they   hoot .
In   his   afterlife   should   he   the   late   Emperor   of   Chen   meet ,   Would   he   have   asked   for   a   replay   of   the   dance    A   Flourishing   Backyard   with   Cajuput  ?
The   heroism   that   once   pervaded   the   world   between   heaven   and   earth ,   Is   still   highly   held   in   awe   throughout   the   thousand   years   since   those   times .
The   strength   of   Shu   stood   firm   upholding   a   third   of   an   ailing   empire ,   Hoping   to   the   dynasty   of   Han   revive .
You   gained   a   premier   who   could   a   kingdom   establish ,   Yet   your   son   was   nowhere   near   as   fine .
Sent   to   misery   were   the   courtesans   of   the   Shu   court ,   Who   could   only   come   to   dance   in   the   the   court   of   Wei ' s   to   a   new   order   abide   by .
I   steer   my   boat   towards   an   isle   in   the   misty   river   to   moor ,   As   daylight   draws   to   a   close ,   there   grows   a   traveller ' s   gloom .
The   wilderness   is   expansive   and   over   trees   the   nightfall   looms ,   The   river   is   clear   bringing   within   reach   a   reflection   of   the   moon .
A   beautiful   lady   has   her   beaded   curtain   raised ,   Behind   which   in   deep   thoughts   she   sits   with   her   elegantly   thin   eyebrows   distorted ;
I   can   see   moist   trails   of   tears   from   corners   of   her   eyes ,   I   wonder   who   it   is   that   she   harbours   resentment   towards ?
The   wind   of   a   clear   autumn   sky   rushes   through   amid   gibbons '   howls ,   Over   the   crystalline   water   and   sand   of   white ,   spiral   and   hover   fowls .
Countless   leaves   rustle ,   fall   and   drift   down   and   away   baring   trees ,   Endlessly   the   Yangtze   flows ,   and   with   billows   abounds .
Ever   so   often   being   thousands   of   miles   away   from   home ,   autumn   grieves   me ,   Living   so   long   a   life   bound   by   illness ,   alone   I   take   in   the   view   here   on   a   high   lookout .
I   made   my   descent   from   the   Zhongnan   Mountains   that   twilight   had   tainted   blue ,   The   mountain   moon   followed   me   down   as   it   rose   high .
I   looked   back   on   the   path   taken ,   Only   to   see   belts   of   viridian   traverse   the   hillside .
On   my   way   I   encountered   a   mountaineer   and   followed   him   home ,   Where   children   came   to   open   a   gate   made   of   twigs   intertwined .
Inside   the   lodge   pleasant   conversations   abounded   and   I   had   a   resting   place   for   the   night ,   Accompanies   by   good   wine ,   we   were   chatty   all   the   while .
We   got   on   to   sing   folk   songs   like   Wind   in   the   Pines ,   By   the   time   we   had   finished   singing ,   many   heavenly   stars   have   retired .
I   was   drunk   in   merriment   and   in   high   spirit   my   company   was ,   In   such   ambience   of   joy ,   the   world   of   concerns   and   politics   was   out   of   mind .
These   red   beans   grow   only   in   the   south ,   In   spring   they   branch   away   and   flourish ;
Why   don ' t   you   harvest   plentiful   to   cherish ,   For   they   are   most   symbolising   of   yearning .
You   sing   a   farewell   song   at   dawn ,   You   begin   to   cross   the   river   with   light   frost   that   had   formed   the   night   before .
Calls   of   wild   geese   would   be   hard   to   tolerate   when   you ' re   feeling   blue ,   Let   alone   the   dreariness   of   the   Cloud   Mountains   that   you   must   trudge   across .
At   the   Fort   of   Hangu   daylight   would   appear   to   intensify   the   cold ,   At   sunset ,   garment   pressing   sounds   from   the   imperial   grounds   would   louder   grow .
The   northerlies   storm   through   snapping   straw - like   grass ,   Snow   begins   to   drift   in   the   Hun   skies   in   August ;
It   is   all   as   sudden   as   the   arrival   of   spring   breezes   overnight ,   At   once   snow   falls   like   when   thousands   and   thousands   of   pear   trees   blossom   and   thrive .
Through   the   beaded   screen   snowflakes   flit   moistening   curtains   of   silk ,   This   weather   makes   fox   coats   lacking   in   warmth   and   brocade   robes   light   for   chills .
The   boundless   desert   has   frozen   over   deeply ,   far   and   wide ,   Under   a   sky   of   low - hanging   gloomy   clouds ,   overcast   is   the   plight   for   thousands   of   leagues .
Outside   the   tent   snow   continues   to   fall   into   the   evening ,   The   wind   seems   to   be   holding   the   red   banners   still   from   fluttering   among   snowflakes
On   the   day   of   your   departure ,   by   your   ornate   window ,   Did   you   notice   any   budding   flowers   on   those   winter   plum   trees ?
An   indistinct   flying   bridge   stands   behind   smoke   of   the   wild ,   To   the   west   of   a   boulder   in   the   water   rests   a   fishing   boat .
And   I   ask : Peach   blossoms   fall   and   drift   in   the   creek   day   and   night ,   Where   lies   the   cavern   that   leads   to   the   utopian   Shangri - la ?
Here   at   the   inn   on   a   hill   overlooking   the   Jinling   Ferry ,   Overnight   travellers   inevitably   feel   their   nostalgia   for   home   swell .
The   river   tide   ebbs   away   as   the   moon   inclines ,   In   the   distance   glimmer   a   few   twinkles   that   I   take   for   Guazhou ' s   presence .
In   a   breeze   that   arrive   at   short   notice   slender   bamboos   sway ,   Shimmering   moonlight   reflects   off   a   still   town .
A   lone   wild   goose   dash   across   the   autumnal   Milky   Way ,   In   the   silence   of   night ,   from   thousands   of   household   rise   garment   pressing   sounds .
It   must   be   late   autumn   by   calendar ,   Excited   about   our   upcoming   reunion ,   I   lie   awake   throughout .
I ' ve   always   liked   reciting   your   elegant   verses ,   Before   I   know   it ,   outside   crow   fowls .
A   young   woman   of   a   blooming   tulip ' s   beauty   was   married   to   a   Lu   family ,   Her   wedded   bliss   was   once   as   envied   as   tortoiseshell   beams   carved   with   swallows   in   pairs .
Messages   from   north   of   the   White   Wolf   River   were   severed ,   Autumn   night   south   of   the   Red   Phoenix   City   seemed   so   long   extended .
Ever   out   of   sight   was   the   fountainhead   of   her   ever   deepening   melancholy   and   despair ,   Who   couldn ' t   be   there   to   this   moment   share   as   the   moon   shined   on   her   aureate   silk   dress .
All   glow   of   the   sun   has   faded   away ,   a   fog   has   spread   to   flowers   conceal ,   Although   moonlight   grows   clear   and   bright ,   misery   brings   insomnia   instead   of   sleep .
I   get   up   to   strum   the   Zhao   zither ,   then   I   mute   it   by   holding   its   phoenix   neck   and   fret ,   Then   I   take   out   the   Shu   cittern   to   play   a   tune   on   this   instrument   used   for   wooing .
Sadly   there   is   no   one   to   help   deliver   my   play   bearing   my   mood ,   I   do   hope   the   spring   breeze   could   my   notes   carry   all   the   way   over   the   Yanran   Peak .
If   you   have   doubt   believing   how   distraught   I   feel ,   Why   don ' t   you   come   back   to   have   a   look   at   the   mirror   before   me .
Quietly   and   quietly   I   await ,   but   for   what ?   Day   after   day   I   return   empty - handed   and   lean .
I   intend   to   look   for   greener   pastures ,   Though   saddened   I   am   by   having   to   of   you   take   leave .
Who   in   power   is   willing   to   lend   a   hand ?   In   this   world ,   friends   as   close   as   one ' s   second   self   are   few   and   far   between .
I   should   known   how   to   keep   my   solitude   company ,   I   shall   go   home   and   stay   within   my   humble   retreat .
Gone   away   from   me ,   Is   the   day   of   yesterday   that   cannot   be   held   on   to ;
What   disturbs   me ,   Is   the   day   today   happens   to   be   that   is   full   of   worries   and   gloom .
At   the   Secretariat   you   write   time - honoured   pieces ,   Akin   to   that   of   Xie   Tao   they   are   also   refreshing   and   full   of   grace ,   Harbouring   aspirations   enthusiastic ,   brave   and   lofty ,   As   if   it   could   lift   one   into   the   sky   to   gaze   at   the   moon   up   close .
I   could   brandish   my   glaive   at   water   but   that   interrupts   not   its   flow ,   I   could   chalice   after   chalice   drink   up   to   quell   the   melancholy   only   to   sink   further   below .
Such   is   life   that   hardly   expectations   satisfy ,   Why   not   let   the   hair   down   tomorrow   morn   and   set   sail   on   a   little   boat .
On   a   night   here   by   Mount   Niuzhu   on   the   western   shore   of   the   Yangtze ,   There   is   not   a   cloud   in   the   deep   blue   sky .
I   am   well   versed   in   the   literary ,   Yet   I ' ve   met   no   one   of   his   like .
Tomorrow   morn   shall   see   me   fill   the   sail ,   As   falling   maple   leaves   scatter   in   the   wind   drifting   by .
Separated   by   mountain   ranges ,   I   was   deprived   of   words   from   home ,   Winter   passed   and   spring   came ,   over   and   again .
As   I   cross   the   Han   River ,   the   impending   homecoming   unnerves   me   so ,   So   much   so   I   shy   away   from   asking   about   my   homeland   of   the   locals .
On   a   clear   autumn   night   in   the   general ' s   headquarters ,   by   the   well   the   phoenix   tree   shivers ,   Spending   the   night   alone   in   a   river   town   I   have   only   the   company   of   a   candle   burning   out .
Throughout   the   night   bugles   blare   like   a   monologue   of   doleful   tones ,   The   bright   moon   rises   high   yet   who   has   the   mood   to   admire   now ?
Protracted   battles   continue   to   dust   storms   stir   and   correspondence   sever ,   Border   passes   have   desolate   and   unsafe   become   making   travels   out   of   bounds .
I   have   been   adrift   alone   for   a   decade   and   more ,   Though   I   managed   to   find   employment   and   survive ,   it   is   only   for   now .
Even   though   a   screen   painted   with   colourful   clouds   looks   ever   so   exquisite ,   In   the   capital ,   once   winter   turns   to   spring   nighttime   is   shortened   against   her   wish .
Inadvertently   she   is   married   to   a   gentleman   of   high   office ,   Who   must   rise   early   and   turn   his   back   on   their   bedchamber   to   attend   morning   assembly .
The   Big   Dipper ' s   seven   stars   hang   high   in   the   sky ,   The   tale   has   it   General   Gesu ' s   sword   was   ready   as   ever   in   the   night .
To   this   day ,   although   western   tribes   crave   to   their   herding   territory   expand ,   They   dare   not   cross   River   Yao   to   strike .
In   the   mountains   the   sun   set   abruptly   in   the   west ,   The   moon   emerged   from   the   pond   in   the   east .
I   let   my   hair   loose   enjoying   the   coolness   of   the   night ,   I   lay   in   the   chamber   with   windows   wide   open   to   indulge   in   air   so   carefree .
I   thought   of   taking   out   my   cittern   to   play ,   Yet   regretfully   there   was   no   kindred   spirit   around   for   my   music   to   please .
Thus   I   thought   of   you ,   wishing   you   were   here ,   On   this   thought   I   dwelled   and   in   vain   I   dreamed .
Hundreds   of   hills   see   not   a   bird   flying   by ,   Thousands   of   paths   bear   not   a   footprint   in   sight ;
One   lone   boat   carries   an   old   man   in   a   bamboo   hat   and   straw   cloak ,   In   solitude   in   the   river   in   the   snow   he   angles   in   the   cold .
After   you   were   gone   floods   came   to   my   doorstep ,   Cicadas   have   stopping   singing   and   dew   grows   heavy   on   trees   at   night .
During   such   a   season   I   think   of   you   constantly ,   I   lean   against   railing   to   stars   gaze   loosing   track   of   time .
Spring   has   gone   far ,   seemingly   as   distant   from   me   as   the   northern   pole   star ,   There   has   been   no   messenger   from   you   since   you   at   the   Southern   Hills   residence   arrived .
Being   a   world   apart   I   had   my   dreams   divined   several   times ,   Leaving   me   with   doubts   and   suspicion   that   you   may   have   met   another   to   admire .
The   pagoda   rises   above   the   earth   sublimely ,   Its   isolated   height   into   heaven   ascends   supremely .
We   climb   atop   and   feel   out   of   this   world ,   As   we   mount   the   stone   stairs ,   suspended   in   the   air   is   the   feel .
Over   the   entire   China   it   seems   to   tower   over ,   As   if   built   by   uncanny   craftsmanship   to   such   elevation   achieve ;
The   four   corners   of   the   pagoda   rise   tall   to   the   white - hot   sun   obstruct ,   Soaring   to   reach   the   vault   of   heaven   are   its   seven   storeys .
The   pagoda ' s   top   offers   a   bird ' s   eye   view   that   could   even   high   flying   birds   guide ,   Leaning   over   we   hear   gusts   of   wind   roar   and   scream .
The   mountain   ranges   undulate   like   the   surging   sea ,   Towards   the   capital   they   seem   to   converge   like   seaward   flowing   rivers   and   creeks .
Lining   the   capital ' s   main   avenue   are   pagoda   trees ,   How   the   palace   and   buildings   delicate   miniatures   seem !
Twilight   in   the   colour   of   fall   casts   over   the   city   from   the   west ,   The   remains   of   the   day   diffuse   within   the   capital   keeps .
To   the   north   lie   five   mausoleums   on   the   plateau ,   Through   history   and   dynastic   changes   those   fields   remain   evergreen .
I ' ve   come   to   understand   the   Buddhist   true   essence ,   I ' ve   always   endeavoured   to   my   integrity   maintain   and   virtues   seek .
I   hereby   vow   to   resign   from   office ,   Buddhist   principles   is   of   eternal   value   to   the   mortal   life   indeed .
Winding   along   the   forest   is   a   clear   brook ,   Riding   leisurely   along   I   am   on   a   horse - drawn   coach .
There   lies   the   ruins   of   a   town   and   an   old   ferry   crossing ,   As   the   sun   declines ,   a   mountain   of   autumn   landscape   basks   in   its   afterglow .
Towards   the   foot   of   the   soaring   Mount   Song   over   yonder ,   I   make   my   return   and   I   shall   soon   have   my   door   to   the   worldly   closed .
Another   year   ends   as   the   sun   and   the   moon   chase   away   ever   shortening   days ,   Here   I   am   at   the   edge   of   the   world   on   a   freezing   night   as   snow   takes   a   break .
As   news   of   more   warring   spread ,   wails   rise   from   households   everywhere ,   Here   and   there   fishermen   and   loggers   have   begun   to   sing   songs   of   those   that   us   invade .
Generals   either   wise   or   foolish   escape   not   from   one   day   dust   and   ashes   become ,   Desolated   I   am   as   there   hardly   ever   come   word   and   letters   from   kith   and   kin   far   away .
The   moon   drooped   low   and   crows   cawed   in   the   frosty   sky ,   Staring   at   riverside   maple   trees   and   lights   on   fishing   boats   is   my   melancholy   sleeplessness .
From   the   Cold   Mountain   Temple   in   the   Suzhou   environs ,   Came   the   midnight   toll   all   the   way   to   visitors '   boats   telling   time .
In   a   drizzle   flows   the   Yangtze   from   the   Chu   region ,   From   the   township   of   Jianye   comes   tolling   of   evening   bells   and   chimes .
There   pass   boat   after   boat   of   sails   weighed   down   by   mist ,   Slowly   flying   by   are   birds   in   the   dimming   skies .
Too   far   out   of   sight   is   where   the   river   meets   the   sea ,   Still   steeped   in   the   delight   of   rain   are   the   blurry   trees   by   the   dockside .
As   I   bid   you   farewell ,   with   pouring   nostalgic   sentiments   I   am   overcome ,   Tears   free   flow   dampening   my   collar   and   robe   like   the   drizzle   that   scatters   before   our   eyes .
We   set   foot   in   autumn   waters   to   bring   our   horses   to   drink ,   The   waters   are   freezing   and   the   wind   piercing   like   a   knife .
The   desert   stretches   on ,   over   which   the   sun   has   not   yet   set ,   Discernible   is   the   town   of   Linyao   in   what   remains   of   twilight .
History   speaks   of   battles   here   at   the   Great   Wall ,   How   spirited   were   the   soldiers   dispatched   from   the   capital   with   their   hopes   so   high .
The   yellow   dust   says   it   all   of   those   gathered   here   today   and   those   of   long   ago ,   Pushing   daisies   in   the   wild   are   heroic   remains   in   piles .
In   spring   orchid   leaves   flourish ,   In   autumn   cinnamon   trees   blossom   brightly .
Such   exhibition   of   vitality ,   Portrays   seasons   lively .
The   verdure   knows   to   natural   instincts   keep ,   Why   would   it   wish   for   discovery   by   the   refined ?
Here   in   the   hollow   of   the   mountains ,   Autumn - like   is   the   weather   in   the   evening .
Through   pines   the   moon ,   so   bright ,   casts   its   shine .   Over   rocks   and   stones   murmurs   spring   water ,   so   pure   and   clean .
Through   the   bamboo   groves   return   ladies   finished   with   their   laundering ,   Fishing   boats   are   lowered   into   the   waters   stirring   lotus   flowers   and   leaves .
Spring   pasture   lingers   on   taking   its   time   before   the   season   turns ,   Noblemen   sauntering   through   are   welcome   to   stay   on   for   keeps .
Fog   has   faded   and   scattered   away   yet   there   is   still   no   other   in   sight ,
In   the   green   of   the   mountains   and   waters   I   pole   my   boat   away   as   I   heave   a   sigh .
I   turn   around   to   see   the   distant   horizon ,   from   where   pour   torrents   of   white   water ,
Over   the   bluff   drift   mindless   clouds   chasing   one   another   in   the   sky .
How   I   long   for   you ,   yet   in   Changan   you   reside .
By   the   ornate   railings   of   the   well ,   cicadas   their   autumn   song   recite ,   Lightly   frosted   and   miserable   is   the   weather ,   bamboo   mats   are   getting   as   cold   as   ice .
A   shady   solitary   lamp   shades   my   yearning   that   only   intensifies ,   I   roll   up   the   screen ,   as   I   gaze   at   the   moon   I   could   only   let   out   very   vain   sighs .
A   beauty   as   beautiful   as   flowers   is   as   far   away   from   me   as   clouds   at   their   great   height ,   High   above   is   the   blue   and   lofty   sky ,   Underneath   a   clear   pond   undulating   with   ripples   lies .
The   road   is   long ,   the   sky   sublime ,   such   is   the   distance   troubling   our   pining   souls ,   Even   in   dreams   our   kindred   spirits   are   unable   to   the   dividing   range   surmount   and   reunite .
How   I   long   for   you ,   how   longing   tortures   this   heart   of   mine .
The   evening   sun   sets   behind   the   Yanzi   Mountains   in   the   west ,   I ' ve   come   to   a   thatched   cottage   to   an   isolated   Buddhist   monk ' s   acquaintance   make .
Then   I   see   him   striking   the   first   evening   bell   on   his   own ,   When   he   takes   a   rest   he   pauses   and   leans   against   his   cane .
The   kaleidoscopic   universe   is   nothing   more   than   a   grain   of   dust ,   How   could   I   insist   on   clinging   onto   love   and   hate ?
People   have   been   driven   from   pillar   to   post   by   the   unrest   in   the   north - east ,   I   have   roved   towards   the   south - western   skies   and   terrain .
Flooded   are   the   terraces   and   towers   of   the   Three   Gorges ,   with   sunlight   and   moonshine ,   The   cultures   of   the   five   streams   and   the   Cloud   Mountains   fairness   emanate .
The   invaders   may   have   pledged   allegiance   yet   unreliable   is   their   word ,   The   literary   would   continue   to   grieve   the   times   as   long   as   they   on   the   road   remain .   .
Hoping   to   visit   you   at   your   mountain - top   hermitage ,   It   must   have   been   tens   of   miles   of   climb   upward .
I   knocked   at   the   entry   but   no   servant   nor   pupil   came   to   the   door   answer ,   I   looked   through   the   window   but   saw   only   furniture .
I   took   it   that   you   were   out   riding   on   your   cart ,   Or   out   fishing   in   autumn   waters .
Regretfully   I   missed   out   on   an   encounter ,   In   vain   was   my   attempt   to   admire   you   in   person .
Then   I   saw   rain   had   given   grass   a   new   green ,   Then   I   heard   pine   trees   rustling   in   the   evening   and   the   sound   windows   traversed .
Although   I   had   not   the   benefit   of   your   presence ,   This   experience   had   been   calming   and   serene .
Having   fared   forth   leaving   the   Jingmen   Mountains   far   behind ,   We   have   sailed   into   the   region   of   Chu   to   roam   its   landscape .
Mountain   scenes   give   place   to   open   country   and   plains ,   Waters   of   creeks   and   streams   aggregate   into   a   river   of   full   spate .
The   moon   casts   on   the   waters   a   reflection   of   a   heavenly   mirage ,   In   the   sky   at   dawn ,   clouds   gather   to   build   a   castle   in   the   air .
How   I   cherish   the   waters   from   home ,   That   have   carried   our   boat   thousands   of   miles   far   and   away .
A   morning   drizzle   in   the   Town   of   Wei   light   dust   on   the   ground   wets ,   Outside   the   hostel   willows   grow   green   and   fresh .
Bidding   you   farewell ,   I ' d   like   to   offer   you   one   more   toast ,   For   west   of   the   Sun   Gate   you   won ' t   come   across   any   old   friend .
You   arrived   in   the   Wu   region   when   icy   rain   rendered   the   river   full ,   Now   at   dawn   I ' m   seeing   you   off   to   cross   the   isolated   mountains   of   Chu .
If   my   family   and   friends   in   Luoyang   asked   about   my   situation ,   You   could   say   that   my   heart   is   crystal   clear   and   kept   jadeite   pure .
I ' ve   come   far   to   bid   you   farewell ,   Staying   behind   with   the   blue   mountains   is   my   reluctance   to   see   you   go .
When   could   we   again   enjoy   a   drink   together ?   Like   we   did   last   night   under   the   moon ' s   glow .
People   from   as   far   as   neighbouring   counties   have   come   to   pay   tribute ,   For   you   are   an   officer   of   honour   having   served   three   emperors   in   a   row .
Back   to   a   riverside   township   I   shall   return   by   myself ,   To   survive   the   rest   of   my   humble   life   with   loneliness   in   tow .
The   walls   of   Changan   hold   history   of   a   past   so   long ,   The   key   river   crossings   into   Shu   lie   far   beyond   the   landscape   in   the   winds   and   smoke .
I   am   filled   with   sadness   that   we   should   have   to   part ,   Such   is   life   for   regional   officers   moving   from   pillar   to   post   that   says   of   us   both .
Forget   not   we   are   close   friends   though   scattered   all   over   we   may   be ,   Like   neighbours   we   shall   be   regardless   of   how   distant   and   remote   our   posts .
Let   us   not   wallow   in   sorrow   as   our   paths   diverge ,   And   cry   unreservedly   like   the   young   at   home .
Behind   the   Palace ' s   guarded   gate   the   moon   trailed   behind   a   thicket   of   trees ,   There   she   was   with   her   enchanting   eyes   admiring   herons   nestled   among   leaves .
By   the   lamp   there   was   light   and   shade ,   she   tilted   her   head   to   a   hairpin   remove ,   To   pick   at   the   flame   hoping   to   a   moth   relieve .
Last   year   we   gathered   and   parted   when   flowers   were   still   in   bloom ,   Now   comes   this   year ' s   blossom ,   a   year   has   since   passed   by .
Unpredictable   is   the   indefinite   and   unfathomable   world   around   us ,   This   spring   I   sleep   in   solitude   with   a   glum   and   gloomy   mind .
Stricken   with   illnesses   I   long   to   hometown   retire   to ,   I   feel   undeserving   of   my   salary   as   on   the   streets   the   destitute   strive   to   survive .
I   hear   mention   of   your   intention   to   visit   here ,   Here   I   await   you   in   the   west   chamber   wondering   how   many   moons   before   you   arrive .
My   old   friend   bade   farewell   to   the   Tower   of   Yellow   Cranes   in   the   west ,   And   headed   downstream   to   Yangzhou   amid   March ' s   blooming   scenes .
My   eyes   followed   his   lone   sail   into   the   distance   to   the   verge   of   the   blue   sky ,   Till   the   Yangtze   gushing   towards   the   horizon   was   all   that   could   be   seen .
On   the   shores   the   grass   gently   sways   in   the   breeze ,   The   mast   of   the   boat   stands   tall   and   alone   in   the   night .
Stars   rise   over   fields   that   spread   far   and   wide ,   The   river   that   perpetually   gushes   through   reflects   the   moon   and   its   shine .
Does   my   reputation   owe   only   to   my   literary   works ?   I   have   grown   senile   with   illness   and   should   perhaps   retire .
I ' ve   been   roaming   without   much   of   a   purpose ,   what   says   that   of   me ?   No   more   than   a   gull   with   no   fixed   abode   on   earth   prowling   the   skies .
The   crystal   clear   waters   the   brilliance   of   twilight   reflect ,   The   fog   surrounding   wandering   isles   rises   to   blend   in   with   the   distant   misty   green .
On   board   ferries ,   horses   neigh   as   they   ride   the   waves   further   along ,   While   waiting   for   ferries   to   their   side   return ,   dockers   rest   by   the   willow   trees .
On   the   sandbank   a   flock   of   egrets   take   flight   scattering   away   from   clumps   and   groves ,   All   but   for   one   which   planes   over   the   expansive   riverside   paddy   fields .
Who   gets   my   drift   as   I   sail   the   waters   in   search   of   Fan   Li ?   As   I   get   carried   away   by   smoky   waters   all   over   in   solitude   leaving   behind   worldly   schemes .
Down   from   a   tower   of   crimson   red   came   a   freshly   powdered   pretty   face ,   Being   confined   to   a   court   saddened   spring   and   its   grace .
Hard   to   come   by   is   spending   time   alone   with   you ,   making   it   all   so   hard   to   say   goodbye ,   In   the   tail   of   spring ,   even   easterlies   lack   the   strength   to   wilting   blooms   revive .
Silk   worms   spin   till   the   end   of   their   living   days ,   Burning   candles   turn   wicks   to   ashes   till   they   can   no   more   tears   of   wax   cry .
In   the   morning ,   you ' d   worry   about   losing   the   shine   in   your   hair   and   your   youthfulness ,   Taking   to   poetry   at   night   I   wonder   if   you   could   feel   the   chill   I   sense   of   moonlight .
Like   the   Magic   Mountains ,   you   may   not   be   far   away   but   inaccessible   you   are   nonetheless ,   For   tidings   of   you   I   could   only   on   the   kind - hearted   blue   birds   rely .
Becoming   chilly   and   crisp   is   the   air ,   and   extended   night - time .   In   the   westerlies   waver   creeping   vines .
Fireflies   from   the   season ' s   end   on   sparkling   dew   drops   rest ,   Across   the   starry   sky   whisk   geese   of   the   wild   taking   early   flight .
At   daybreak   trees   of   lofty   height   denser   seem ,   More   mountains   and   hills   come   to   the   fore   on   a   day   so   fine .
Leaves   have   begin   to   fall   south   of   River   Huai ,   I   have   a   feeling   that   among   misty   waters   I   shall   remain   as   I   age   past   my   prime .
I   fermented   some   wine   using   rice   obtained   from   public   fields ,   in   my   spare   time   I   brought   some   of   this   wine   to   place   in   the   lake ,   to   get   drunk   on   it ;
happily   becoming   intoxicated ,   I   sat   ashore ,   extending   my   arm   towards   Stone   Fish   the   boulder   to   ladle   out   wine   stored   in   its   hollow   and   float   it   in   tiny   vessels   for   those   seated   around .
I   pretended   I   was   leaning   against   the   Ba   Mountains   and   having   a   drink   over   Mount   Sovereign ,   with   my   company   seated   around   the   Dongting   and   bowls   of   wine   swaying   between   waves ,   I   wrote   a   poem   to   sing   such   a   delight .
Lake   Stone   Fish ,   very   much   like   Lake   Dongting   it   is ,   The   summer   flow   swells   around   a   boulder   in   the   shape   of   green   Mount   Sovereign .
We   take   the   lake   as   our   pond   and   the   hollow   of   the   boulder   as   the   crock   for   our   wine ,   My   fellow   drinkers   one   after   another   take   a   seat   on   irregular   rocks   nearby .
For   days   on   end ,   strong   winds   have   been   stirring   up   giant   waves ,   Yet   it   stops   not   people   from   floating   tugboats   of   wine   in   the   lake .
On   a   miniature   hill   of   the   Ba   Mountains   I   a   long   ladle   hold   out ,   Offering   more   wine   in   scoops   to   those   around   to   the   doldrums   drown .
Evening   approaches   finding   my   spirit   indisposed ,   So   I   rode   a   buggy   up   the   historic   site .
Sunset   is   ever   so   beautiful ,   Regrettably   as   dusk   fades ,   impends   night .
Zhuge   was   as   capable   as   Guan   and   Le   and   deserving   of   such   comparison ,   Yet   Guan   and   Zhang   had   not   the   fate   to   escape   their   demise .
One   day   when   I   pass   by   the   shrine   commemorating   Zhuge   in   the   Magnificent   City ,   I   shall   many   more   sentiments   and   regrets   feel   after   I   the   song   of   Liangfu   recite .
As   the   Cold   Fare   Festival   approaches   grasses   flourish   in   the   rain ,   Spring   breezes   of   wheat   seedlings   and   willows   by   the   bank   lively   waves   make .
Many   like   me   have   a   home   to   return   to   but   are   elsewhere   detained ,   Oh   I   beg   of   cuckoos   to   hold   their   sorrowful   coos   when   they ' re   within   my   range .
 In   the   tenth   year   of   the   Yuanhe   era ,   I   was   demoted   to   the   Nine   Rivers   region   to   be   a   State   Inspector ' s   lieutenant .   In   autumn   of   the   following   year ,   I   was   seeing   off   guests   at   the   Penpu   ferry   terminal ,   at   night   I   heard   someone   playing   pipa   on   board   a   boat ,
Now   her   youthful   beauty   has   passed ,   she   settled   for   marrying   a   trader .   I   ordered   some   wine   and   made   a   request   for   her   to   play   a   few   allegros ,   after   which   she   seemed   aggrieved .   She   began   to   talk   about   the   merry   days   of   her   childhood ,   now   she   was   thin   and   pallid   from   all   this   wandering   around ,   adrift   in   the   world .   I   had   been   posted   to   the   regional   for   two   years ,   and   I   had   been   feeling   self - complacent   and   contented ,   yet   upon   hearing   her   words ,   I   began   to   feel   I   was   in   exile ,   I   therefore   wrote   a   long   lyric   for   her ,   a   total   of   six   hundred   and   sixteen   words ,   titled   Ode   to   a   Lady ' s   Pipa   Play .
Seeing   off   my   guests   at   night   at   the   Xunyang   terminal   of   the   Yangtze ,   Maple   leaves   and   white   reed   flowers   scatter   over   a   green   field   an   autumn   scene .
Inebriated   we   became   but   gathered   little   enjoyment   as   parting   drew   near ,   By   this   time ,   soaking   in   the   vast   river   waters   was   a   reflection   of   the   moon .
Suddenly   from   over   the   waters   came   the   sound   of   pipa   play ,   That   had   me   forgetting   to   home   return   and   my   guests   reluctant   to   set   their   sail .
We   followed   the   melody   and   enquired ,    who   plays ?  The   performance   stopped   and   hesitating   was   the   reply .
We   floated   our   boat   over   to   request   a   meeting ,   Then   we   called   for   more   wine   and   dishes   to   go   with   it ,   and   had   the   lamps   rekindled .
It   was   after   many   invitations ,   call   after   call ,   before   she   showed   herself ,   Even   then ,   she   held   her   pipa   close   and   revealed   only   half   of   her   countenance .
She   picked   a   few   notes   as   she   her   pipa   strings   tightened   and   tuned ,   Evoking   a   sentimental   appeal   even   before   a   melody   was   played .
It   was   as   if   every   string   held   suppressed   emotions   released   note   by   note ,   As   if   recounting   her   disappointing   life   that   didn ' t   her   expectations   meet ,   not   even   close .
She   lowered   her   head   and   continue   to   casually   pick   and   strum ,   Emptying   out   what   had   been   repressed   within ,   her   misery   and   sorrows .
Her   was   skilled   with   the   strings ,   be   it   a   light   pluck ,   a   slow   stroke ,   a   strum   or   a   pick ,   Firstly   she   played   the   tune ,   the   Rainbow   Dress   and   Feather   Robes ,   then   the   Little   Six .
Notes   high   and   low   a   composition   form   as   she   played ,   It   was   like   countless   beads   of   large   and   small   falling   onto   a   jadeite   plate .
At   one   time   it   flowed   agreeably   like   the   warble   of   orioles   flitting   through   flowers ,   Then   it   turned   into   a   seemingly   suppressed   sob   of   spring   water   over   a   sandy   trail .
Frigid   seemed   the   strings   uttering   notes   sounding   like   springs   cold   and   jolted ,   Cold   and   jolted ,   it   came   to   a   halt .
Muted   was   the   music ,   yet   gloomy   was   the   stillness   that   had   begun   to   regret   manifest ,   Right   then ,   no   sound   could   compete   with   what   such   a   resounding   silence   could   carry .
All   of   a   sudden ,   it   was   like   an   exploding   water   bottle   bursting   forth   splashes   and   sprays ,   Or   like   the   clanking   of   crossing   swords   when   the   cavalry   makes   a   raid .
There   was   her   boat   and   there   was   ours ,   both   carrying   silence ,   In   the   river   waters   there   reflected   the   autumn   moon   brightly   aglow .
In   her   reticence   she   replaced   the   pick   among   the   pipa   strings ,   She   then   smoothed   her   clothes   to   stand   up   and   put   on   a   reserved   expression .
She   said :    I   had   my   origin   in   the   capital ,   My   home   was   in   the   southern   red - light   district .
At   the   end   of   my   performance ,   even   music   masters   would   offer   their   compliments ,   With   make - up   my   visage   would   sicken   many   a   courtesan   with   jealousies .
Many   of   my   hairpins   and   jewellery   fell   to   pieces   as   I   clapped   to   the   beats   as   I   sang ,   My   scarlet   silk   skirt   was   used   to   becoming   stained   with   tipped   over   drinks .
One   day ,   my   brother   was   conscripted   by   the   army   and   my   aunt   died ,   Gone   was   dawn   and   arrived   dusk ,   overnight   my   looks   were   a   thing   of   the   past ;
Coaches   seldom   came   by   my   door   to   bring   any   to   attention   pay ,   Being   past   my   prime ,   I   had   little   option   but   to   marry   a   trader .
In   business ,   parting   plays   second   fiddle   to   achievable   profits ,   Just   last   month   he   set   off   for   Fuliang   to   buy   tea .
Leaving   me   here   by   the   terminal   minding   the   boat .
A   bright   moon   makes   the   waters   seem   colder   as   I   stay   on   board   and   afloat .   Deep   in   the   night   I ' d   dream   of   my   youthful   years ,   Sometimes   I ' d   wake   up   with   tears   running   rusty   streaks   on   my   powdered   face . 
Her   pipa   play   already   had   me   heaving   sighs   of   lament ,   Hearing   her   account   further   depressed   me   deep   in   grief .
We   are   both   disadvantaged   wayfarers   of   this   world ,   Must   we   be   acquaintances   in   order   to   compassion   show   as   our   paths   cross ?
 As   for   me ,   I   left   the   capital   last   year ,   To   come   to   my   demoted   post   here   in   the   town   of   Xunyang ,   and   fell   ill .
Xunyang   is   remote   in   location   and   there   is   no   music   around ,   All   year   round   I ' ve   heard   not   a   note   of   orchestral   sound .
Where   I   live   is   close   to   the   Pen   River ,   a   damp   low - lying   area ,   Yellow   reeds   and   bitter   bamboos   around   my   cottage   thrive .
In   such   an   environment   what   do   I   have   to   listen   to   day   and   night ?   Nothing   but   blood - weeping   cuckoos   and   howling   gibbons .
Be   it   a   flowering   spring   day   on   the   river   or   a   moonlit   autumn   night ,   I   would   often   take   out   some   wine   to   drink   by   myself .
Tonight   upon   hearing   your   pipa   play ,   It   was   like   immersing   in   heavenly   sounds   enlightening   my   sense   of   hearing .
Please   decline   not ,   play   us   an   encore ,   I   shall   write   for   you   a   poem   on   your   pipa   play ,   an   ode . 
She   heard   me   and   there   long   she   stood ,   Then   she   sat   down ,   tightened   the   strings   and   plucked   a   tune   of   rapid   movement .
Sad   and   sombre   was   the   tone ,   unlike   the   sonorous   melodies   of   before ,   This   time   everyone   there   covered   their   faces   to   sob .
Among   them   who   shed   tears   the   most ?   It   had   to   be   a   lieutenant   of   the   River   State ,   so   drenched   in   tears   was   his   blue   robe .
Sobbing   in   silence   is   a   desolated   old   man   from   Shaoling ,   Lurking   in   the   most   winding   of   the   Winding   River   on   a   spring   day ;
The   palace   by   the   river   has   locks   on   its   thousand   doors ,   For   whom   the   willows   and   cattails   have   come   green   again ?
I   still   remember   the   emperor ' s   visit   to   the   South   Garden   escorted   by   colourful   banners ,   That   enhanced   glow   and   shine   to   the   scenes   there .
The   very   mistress   of   the   Morning   Glory   Hall ,   Rode   along   by   the   emperor ' s   side   in   the   royal   coach   to   his   every   whim   serve .
Before   the   coach   led   maids   girt   with   bows   and   arrows ,   While   white   steeds   masticated   on   the   gilded   bridle .
Then   a   maid   would   take   a   shot   at   the   clouds   at   a   turn   of   her   figure ,   One   shot   could   take   down   a   pair   of   flitting   birds .
Now   where   can   the   bright - eyed   beauty   with   a   brilliant   grin   be   found ?   For   blood - stained   is   her   soul   that   can   never   return .
Forever   running   eastwards   is   the   limpid   River   Wei ,   and   the   Sword   Pass ,   ever   so   remote ,   Between   an   expedition   to   take   refuge   and   a   journey   home ,   they   had   lost   each   other .
Sentiments   drive   emotions   and   evoke   tears   to   roll   and   one ' s   chest   wet ,   Will   feelings   like   the   ever - flowing   river   waters   and   splashes   ever   cease   and   disappear ?
Han   Emperor   Wen   commissioned   this   grand   lookout   to   appeal   to   immortal   greats ,   I   embark   on   a   climb   to   see   the   first   light   of   dawn   on   this   festive   day .
The   north - facing   Cloud   Mountains   range   across   the   three   states   that   succeeded   Jin ,   From   the   hills   that   witnessed   the   rise   of   Xia   and   Zhou   come   easterlies   and   rain .
Who   in   this   day   and   age   could   Laozi   meet   like   the   gatekeeper   did ?   The   elder   on   the   river   never   returned   once   he   immortal   became .
I   should   hope   I   could   locate   a   county   officer   like   the   one   that   Pengze   once   had ,   By   some   chrysanthemum   shrubs   we ' d   drink   together   to   tipsy   become   and   spirits   elate .
We   meet   on   horseback   and   have   nothing   to   write   on   or   with ,   I ' ll   rely   on   you   to   call   upon   my   home   and   the   news   of   my   safety   convey .
With   a   broom   she   awaits   the   opening   of   the   Main   Court   at   morning ' s   first   light ,   She   roams   the   hallways   with   her   round   fan   dusting   away   in   her   idle   time .
She   could   not   help   but   feel   that   her   face   has   been   outshone   by   even   winter   ducks ,   Which   reflect   the   radiance   from   the   Mansion   of   Morning   Glory   as   they   flit   by .
As   the   skies   clear   and   clouds   part   I   see   the   town   of   Hanyang   in   the   distance ,   It   looks   to   takes   another   day   under   sail   before   we   there   arrive .
Autumn   colours   of   the   tri - region   of   Xiang   contrast   my   blues   and   greying   sideburns ,   Clear   under   the   moon   is   my   wish   to   home   return   through   thousands   of   miles .
Much   of   family   property   must   have   perished   in   the   upheaval ,   Yet   along   the   river   there   continue   to   resound   blaring   bugles   and   drum   strikes !
I ' ve   always   been   like   the   madman   of   Chu ,   Singing   satires   on   Confucian   ideals .
In   my   hand   is   a   cane   as   green   as   jade ,   As   I   farewell   the   Tower   of   Yellow   Storks   at   daybreak ;
Distance   matters   not   as   I   go   around   visiting   the   five   eminent   peaks   hoping   to   find   sages ,   For   I   love   climbing   renowned   mountains   in   my   living   days .
There   ripple   reflections   of   mountains   in   the   lake   shining   green   dazzles ,   The   Stone   Gate   Summit   sits   like   a   palace   flanked   by   two   peaks   by   its   sides .
Waters   stream   from   hills   like   the   Milky   Way   overhung ,   straddled   by   three   stone   bridges ,   Over   there   cascades   a   waterfall   off   the   Peak   of   Fragrant   Furnace   on   the   other   side .
Surrounded   and   barricaded   by   precipices   among   boundless   fog ,   I   feel   like   I ' m   taking   flight .
Mountains   are   brilliantly   green   and   clouds   aglow   in   the   morning   sun ,   There   is   not   a   bird   on   the   wing   in   the   vast   domain   of   the   Wu   skies .   Having   surmounted   such   height   to   look   far   into   the   world ,   There   the   Yangtze   rushes   away   spectacularly ,   never   to   return .
The   weather   is   about   to   change   as   thousands   of   miles   of   glowing   clouds   drift   in   the   wind ,   Waterfalls   cap   mountains   like   snow ,   down   they   flow   on   their   separate   ways   into   nine   rivers .
I   come   up   with   a   lyric   on   the   Lu   Mountains   to   a   folk   song ,   As   I   my   moments   in   the   Lu   Mountains   enjoy .
By   the   Stone   Mirror   I   reflect   on   myself   to   clear   my   mind ,   Where   Master   Xie   left   his   footprints   has   long   been   covered   by   layers   of   moss .
Maybe   in   order   to   the   worldly   forget   I   should   resort   to   alchemy ,   To   help   me   accumulate   intrinsic   strength   and   focus   on   the   essence   of   Taoist   practice .
I   seem   to   see   a   sage   riding   among   colourful   clouds ,   She   has   a   lotus   in   her   hand   as   she   makes   her   way   towards   the   celestial   palace .
I ' ve   made   a   pact   with   you   to   journey   to   the   farthest ,   beyond   the   nine   levels   of   skies ,   And   join   the   legendary   Lu   Ao   on   our   way   to   sightsee   heaven ' s   grandness .
I ' m   on   may   way   roaming   towards   my   post   in   the   regional ,   I   stop   my   horse   by   your   tomb   to   say   goodbye .
Around   where   I   stand ,   no   earth   could   keep   dry   from   my   tearful   cry ,   Above   me   patches   of   clouds   float   in   the   low   hanging   skies .
In   the   face   of   an   impending   storm ,   Xie   An   and   the   like   could   calmly   play   a   game   of   chess ,   Ji   Zi   bestowed   his   sword   upon   a   tree   by   Xu   Jun ' s   grave   to   his   spirit   sympathise .
Blossoms   falling   adrift   in   the   woods   say   it   all ,   Amid   a   few   warbles   of   orioles   away   I   ride .
 On   the   nineteenth   of   October   in   the   second   year   of   the   Dali   era ,   I   saw   a   sword   dance   by   a   Madam   Li   of   Lingying   at   the   house   of   Yuan   Chi ,   a   lieutenant   of   the   Kui   State   Office ,   I   really   admired   the   smooth   flow   of   her   dance .   I   asked   her   from   whom   she   had   learn   the   dance   from ,   she   replied :    I   am   a   disciple   of   Madam   Gongsun . 
In   the   third   year   of   Kaiyuan ,   I   was   merely   a   youngster ,   yet   I   still   remember   seeing   Gongsun ' s   dances   with   swords   and   Huntuo   felt   hats ,   a   series   of   rise   and   fall ,   turns   and   spins ,   outstandingly   choreographed ,   unparalleled   by   her   contemporaries .   Of   all   the   leads   in   the   Pear   Garden   operatic   circle ,   and   those   outside   of   the   arena ,   no   one   could   perform   these   dances   as   well   as   Gongsun   in   those   early   years   of   the   Sacred   Xuanzhong   Emperor   of   literary   and   military   might .
Back   then   she   was   beautiful   and   splendidly   dressed ,   now   I   am   a   man   with   a   head   of   grey ;   even   her   disciple   is   no   longer   of   a   young   age .
Since   I   am   now   aware   of   her   background ,   I   know   that   her   dance   routine   is   like   no   other .   Memory   of   a   bygone   age   has   evoked   many   sentiments ,   leading   me   to   a   poem   write ,   one   Ode   to   Swords .
Once   Zhang   Xu   of   the   Wu   region ,   who   was   skilled   in   cursive   calligraphy ,   saw   Madam   Gongsun ' s   West   River   sword   dance   in   the   Ye   County ,   as   a   result ,   his   cursive   script   improved   significantly ,   and   developed   a   style   that   was   grand ,   vigorous   and   emotional .   Such   is   the   apparent   influence   of   Gongsun ' s   performance !
Once   there   was   a   fair   lady   by   the   name   of   Gongsun ,   She   used   to   cause   a   great   sensation   all   over   when   she   danced   with   swords .
Crowds   would   gather   and   build   up ,   surprised   and   astonished   they   would   be ,   Even   heaven   and   earth   would   come   together   for   her   performance   in   accord .
She   used   to   commence   a   dance   with   the   power   of   thunderbolts   topping   all   fury ,   And   end   like   still   rivers   and   seas   where   a   clear   reflection   of   the   moon   would   come   to   port .
Lonesomeness   would   have   begun   to   show   on   her   crimsoned   lips   and   graceful   sleeves ,   At   least   in   her   late   years   she   had   a   disciple   to   her   artistic   skills   pass   on .
This   fair   lady   of   Lingying   has   come   to   Baidi ,   She   performed   a   high - spirited   dance   of   vigour   without   a   flaw .
I   went   over   to   talk   to   her   for   a   while ,   I   couldn ' t   help   becoming   sentimental   as   we   speak   of   the   times   forever   gone .
The   late   emperor   had   maids   of   some   eight   thousands ,   Gongsun ' s   dancing   skills   with   swords   came   number   one .
In   a   turn   of   a   hand   gesture   readily   gone   were   fifty   years   of   history ,   As   upheavals   and   dust   storms   had   the   imperial   court   engulfed .
The   operatic   circle   of   the   Pear   Garden   had   since   scattered   like   smoke ,   What   remains   of   operatic   ladies '   charm   now   cheerlessly   reflects   in   the   frosty   sun .
Before   Xuanzong ' s   tomb   on   the   Golden   Grain   Mound   now   arch   mature   trees ,   The   stone   castle   by   the   Qutang   Gorge   is   surrounded   by   a   deary   field   where   grass   rustles .
Coming   to   an   end   is   a   lavish   banquet   and   a   busy   orchestra ,   As   music   fades ,   sadness   takes   place ,   over   in   the   east   the   moon   is   up .
Which   way   should   an   old   man   like   me   head   towards ?   On   my   callous   feet   in   the   desolate   mountains ,   my   thoughts   are   turning   glum .
Below   the   Heavenly   Terrace   appear   to   lay   the   towns   and   towers   of   the   immortals ,   The   overnight   rain   has   eased   away   leaving   a   desolate   scene .
Evening   comes ,   the   trees   of   Qin   and   the   mountains   merge   in   colour ,   one   ancient   green ,   From   the   Palace   of   Han   resound   autumnal   calls   of   garment   pressing   peals .
In   stillness ,   a   bare   altar   stands   and   on   it   fall   shadows   of   sparsely   spaced   pines ,   Fragrant   grasses   surround   meditation   caves   and   dens   in   the   hills .
Why   look   elsewhere   for   peace   out   of   this   world ?   When   here   on   earth   already   exist   Sanguine   Hills ,   a   realm   of   heavenly   feel .
Admirers   of   spring   flowers   have   left   the   galleries ,   Adrift   in   the   garden   are   fallen   blossoms .
Feeling   gutted   I   have   not   the   heart   to   sweep   them   away ,   As   they   are   probably   still   looking   forward   to   former   glory   restore .
Blue   mountains   traverse   the   landscape   to   the   north   of   town ,   A   stretch   of   white   water   winds   around   the   town ' s   east .
Here   we   are   bidding   farewell ,   From   here   on   you   are   like   a   lone   dandelion   on   a   ten - thousand - mile   journey .
A   traveller   like   you   roams   like   floating   clouds ,   Like   the   declining   sun   must   set   you   must   leave .
We   wave   at   each   other   and   off   you   go ,   There   goes   a   neighing   horse   separated   from   its   pack ,   neighing   its   grief .
Where   lies   the   shrine   commemorating   the   renowned   Premier   of   Shu ?   On   the   outside ,   the   Magnificent   City   is   surrounded   with   groves   of   cypress   trees .
The   terrace   contrasts   the   spread   of   green   lawn   painting   a   field   of   spring ,   Through   the   foliage   comes   orioles '   singing ,   in   vain   in   seems .
His   hut   was   frequented   thrice   over ,   he   was   sought   after   to   warring   states   pacify ,   He   gave   his   heart   and   soul   in   helping   his   master   and   son   establish   a   state   of   ideals .
Yet   he   died   before   his   military   expeditions   for   unity   could   succeed ,   His   regret   often   has   those   of   similar   aspirations   weep   tears   of   grief .
Unable   to   fall   asleep   I   am   on   a   bed   with   a   chilly   bamboo   mat   awash   with   moonlight ,   The   sky   is   azure   like   deep   water   with   light   clouds   of   night .
Quacks   of   wild   geese   fade   away   as   they   towards   Xiao   and   Xiang   waters   fly ,   Here   in   a   lofty   of   a   grand   elevation   in   the   capital ,   only   the   moon   remains   bright .
Over   the   snow - covered   West   Mountains ,   soldiers   three   counties   defend ,   Over   the   clear   river   to   the   south   of   town ,   straddles   the   Bridge   of   Long   Mile .
A   nation   in   war   separates   me   and   my   younger   brothers   from   one   another ,   I   weep   in   solitude   in   a   far   corner   under   a   distant   sky .
Old   and   often   bed - ridden ,   I   am   a   candle   in   the   wind ,   Yet   I   have   done   not   a   thing   in   contribution   to   our   nation   of   might .
I   take   a   ride   on   a   horse   to   the   countryside   and   look   afield   as   far   as   I   could ,   Yet   I   cannot   bear   to   see   our   state   affairs   continue   to   deteriorate   as   days   go   by .
Mountain   rocks ,   there   were   many   of   them ,   rough   and   tough ,   along   a   narrow   trail ,   I   arrived   at   a   temple   in   the   wild   at   twilight ,   overhead   flew   bats   making   sail .
Towards   the   hall   I   made   my   way   and   sat   on   the   terrace   to   admire   the   new   rain   by   my   feet ,   There   were   banana   leaves   broad   and   long ,   and   gardenia   petals   plump   and   animated .
The   resident   monk   praised   the   ancient   murals   of   Buddha   inside   the   temple ,   I   lit   a   torch   to   see ,   they   were   truly   unique   and   I   was   amazed .
He   prepared   a   bed   for   me ,   frisked   away   dust   and   brought   me   a   meal ,   It   was   light   and   vegetarian   with   brown   rice ,   yet   more   than   enough   to   my   hunger   satiate .
At   night   I   lay   in   silence   and   I   heard   not   a   hum   of   insects ,   A   clear   moon   rose   over   the   hills   casting   shine   through   the   window   panes .
At   daybreak   I   left   alone   unable   to   find   my   way ,   Up   there   and   down   below ,   everywhere   was   engulfed   in   a   haze .
As   it   cleared ,   crimson   flowers   and   the   green   ravine   weaved   a   brilliant   landscape .
Common   were   pines   and   oaks ,   they   were   mature   with   impressive   waists ,   I   stepped   onto   boulders   under   the   current   of   the   waters   barefoot ,   As   the   wind   stirred   my   robe ,   the   waters   around   me   loquaciously   babbled   and   rippled   away .
A   moment   like   this   in   life   should   be   enjoyed ,   Why   constrain   oneself   to   how   worldly   people   should   behave ?
Oh ,   my   fellow   associates   sharing   the   same   ideals ,   Why   haven ' t   you   retired ,   now   that   you   have   all   reached   old   age ?
The   River   of   Wei   flows   and   winds   around   the   ancient   Qin   frontier ,   Deep   in   the   valley   tilts   the   Yellow   Mountain   Palace   from   the   Han   dynasty .
Through   clusters   of   willowy   arches   the   Emperor ' s   carriage   and   company   march ,   Along   the   corridor   the   Emperor   turns   around   time   and   again   to   the   Royal   Garden   admire .
In   the   clouds   perched   the   capital ' s   Double   Phoenix   Tower ,   Among   rain   and   trees   of   spring   spread   tens   of   thousands   of   households   of   the   shire .
Today   the   Emperor   rides   in   the   force   of   prosperity   obliging   nature ,   Mistake   not   this   for   an   excursion   of   pleasure   and   sightseeing .
Parting   with   beloved   kins   and   confidants   is   saddening   and   sorrowful ,   There   sail   ferry   boats   venturing   in   a   heavy   haze .
Today   we   bid   each   other   farewell ,   Where   and   when   would   we   reunite   again ?
Life   is   much   like   boats   in   waves ,   How   could   anyone   in   steams   and   whirls   steer   and   hold   a   level   plane ?
You ' d   see   her   where   gods   reside ,   either   at   the   peak   of   the   Celestial   Mountains ,   Or   on   the   Jadeite   Terrace   under   a   heavenly   moon .
A   nostalgic   heart   grows   even   more   so   come   New   Year ,   Alone   at   the   edge   of   the   world   I   cry   lonely   tears .
I   am   still   bending   my   back   for   others   even   at   my   old   age ,   Before   I   could   home   return ,   come   again   has   spring .
Ah ,   what   are   your   thoughts   on   today ' s   farewell ?   Hold   your   horses   and   take   a   sip   as   where   you ' re   demoted   to   cause   me   to   concern   bear ..
The   Wicked   Gorge   is   said   to   be   surrounded   with   gibbon   cries   evocative   of   sorrowful   tears ,   Hengyang   is   where   wild   geese   would   return   from   as   they   many   a   letter   carry .
On   the   River   of   Green   Maple   in   autumn   your   sail   fares   forth   into   the   distance ,   You ' d   find   the   town   of   Baidi   surrounded   with   ancient   trees   that   have   lost   their   foliage .
A   capable   reign   is   upon   us   that   shall   the   common   people   tend   to   and   grace   bestow   upon ,   Let   us   falter   not   in   the   face   of   a   parting   that   shall   be   only   temporary .
Tonight   the   host   has   brought   out   the   wine   for   a   feast ,   And   engaged   to   melodies   perform   is   a   cittern   master   of   Guangling   pieces .
The   moon   has   risen   high   shining   all   over   town ,   flying   in   mid   sky   are   magpies   and   crows .   Frost   has   formed   on   boughs   and   twigs   and   the   wind   sends   chills   through   the   robes ;
The   bronze   burner   of   exquisite   incense   brightly   glows ,   First   plucked   and   strummed   is   the   tune   of   the   Lu   Waters ,   then   Chu   Concubine   follows .
Once   music   arises ,   all   else   in   silence   fall ,   A   muted   full   house   listened   on   till   the   sight   of   stars   is   about   to   be   lost .
I   am   ten   thousands   miles   away   from   home   assigned   to   the   clear   waters   of   Huai ,   How   I   wish   to   resign   this   instant   so   as   to   among   clouds   and   mountains   reside .
Clear   zither   notes   tell   of   bitterness   that   reverberate   in   the   night ,   Like   wuthering   winds   and   rain   the   strings   vibrate .
Under   a   solitary   lamp   I   hear   in   the   air   the   sound   of   Chu   bugles ,   Over   and   behind   the   terrace   the   moon   on   the   wane   inclines .
Grasses   are   wilting   speaking   of   lateness ,   My   old   friends   has   not   yet   come   to   our   rendezvous   realise .
Autumn   has   arrived   and   it   is   full   moon   again ,   The   town   falls   under   the   cover   of   night   with   thousands   asleep .
With   each   other   we   here   reunite   like   we   once   did   south   of   the   Yangtze ,   I   cannot   help   but   wonder   if   this   is   a   dream .
Treetops   sway   in   the   breeze   startling   magpies   perched   on   high   in   the   dark ,   Dew   grows   heavy   muffling   cricket   cries   in   the   bleak .
Being   a   seasoned   traveller   we ' d   often   drink   till   we   are   drunk ,   Keeping   each   other   company   as   we   dread   dawn ' s   bell   when   we ' d   have   to   take   leave .
A   screen   made   of   mica   reflects   shadows   and   shades   in   candlelight ,   The   Milky   Way   slides   low   and   stars   dim   as   approaches   daylight .
A   pipe   dream   it   had   been   for   me ,   ten   years   in   Yangzhou ,   a   fool ' s   paradise ,   Infamously   unfaithful   was   my   claim   to   fame   in   districts   of   red   lantern   lights .
Before   the   Peak   of   Huile ,   sand   blows   like   snow ,   Outside   the   town   of   Shouxiang   the   moon   is   as   white   as   hoarfrost .
From   somewhere   blows   a   tune   of   reed ,   Evoking   homesickness   in   soldiers   all   night   long .
Sitting   behind   layers   of   thin   wallflower   draperies   embroidered   with   phoenix   tails ,   She   busied   over   brocading   an   emerald   curtain   dome   in   the   still   of   night .
Over   there   she   sat   with   a   round   fan   trying   to   her   shyness   hide ,   Before   we   could   words   exchange ,   in   a   series   of   claps   a   carriage   had   taken   her   away .
Under   a   willow   tree   by   the   embankment   I   have   my   spotty   nag   tied ,   To   the   west ,   to   the   south   or   wherever   blows   the   wind ,   where   could   I   my   lady   find ?
There   has   been   no   contact   between   them   and   us   ever   since ,   Forever   separated   are   those   dead   and   alive .
There   probably   remains   no   one   to   follow   up   and   decamp ,   Those   horses   that   manage   to   return   may   still   our   military   banners   recognise .
I ' d   like   to   hold   a   memorial   service   for   you ,   yet   I   am   doubtful   if   you   had   really   perished ,   Here   in   a   world   so   vast   and   broad ,   for   you   I   cry .
From   a   splendid   tower   amidst   the   skies   came   singing   and   orchestral   play ,   The   wind   court   ladies '   laughter   and   vocals   mingled   and   conveyed .
Shadows   shifted   through   the   night   in   the   monotony   of   moonshine ,   Crystalline   curtains   swung   and   swayed   resembling   the   Milky   Way .
The   northerlies   bring   chills   from   the   edge   of   the   sky   yonder ,   I   wonder   what   is   on   you   mind ?
When   could   wild   geese   bring   me   letters   from   you ,   I   suppose   they   are   held   back   by   rivers   and   lakes   high   with   autumn   tides .
A   smooth   life   offers   little   drive   for   those   honing   their   literary   works ,   Where   you   are   posted   are   the   land   of   ghosts   and   spirits   hoping   to   encounter   human   lives .
Perhaps   you   should   the   wronged   spirit   of   Qu   Yuan   converse   with ,   And   offer   the   Miluo   River   a   poem   or   two   as   a   tribute   to   him ,   a   sacrifice .
Buried   deep   in   the   sand   are   broken   lances ,   have   yet   rust   are   their   spearheads ,   I   wash   them   up   and   recognise   they   are   from   a   historic   period .
Had   the   easterlies   not   blown   in   General   Zhou ' s   favour ,   Cao ' s   Tower   of   Bronze   Peacocks   would   have   held   hostage   the   nubile   Qiao   sisters .
I   left   home   a   youngster   and   returned   a   senior ,   Though   greyed   my   temple   hair   has ,   changed   my   accent   has   not .
Even   noted   hermits   of   the   Eastern   Mountains ,   Would   set   aside   garden   tilling   to   the   government   rejoin .
Last   spring ,   just   north   of   the   Yangtze   was   where   you   spent   the   Day   of   Cold   Fare ,   This   spring ,   just   south   of   the   Yellow   River   you   had   your   robes   mended .
Today   I   set   a   farewell   banquet   along   the   State   Avenue   outside   the   capital ,   Today   we   shall   part   though   we   share   the   same   ideals ;
Soon   you   shall   set   sail   on   board   boats   with   laurel   oars ,   Before   long   knocking   on   family ' s   brushwood - door   you   will   be .
Along   the   way ,   trees   and   their   reflection   will   line   the   path   you   take ,   And   there   will   be   twilight   reflecting   off   isolated   townships .
Although   you   were   unsuccessful   this   time   round ,   That   is   not   a   reason   to   assume   a   lack   of   respect   from   your   peers !
Armed   guards   solemnly   stand   watch   outside ,   In   the   private   chamber   incense   burns   and   its   refreshing   fragrance   intensifies .
Winds   and   rain   drift   in   from   the   sea ,   Cooling   the   pond ,   the   pavilion   and   the   mind .
The   sultry   and   irritating   weather   has   all   but   vanished ,   Distinguished   and   respectable   guests   a   full   house   gather   to   dine .
Shame   on   me   for   although   I   have   achieved   high   office ,   I   have   become   too   far   removed   from   commoners '   everyday   life .
Yet   so   long   such   disparity   is   brought   to   the   fore ,   dealt   with   it   shall   be ,   Formality   restricts   not   knowledgeable   and   generous   minds .
Though   seafood   and   meats   of   red   and   white   are   limited   on   rations ,   Fortunately   vegetables   and   fruits   remain   available   delights .
A   cheerful   and   satisfied   soul   can   also   the   body   lighten ,   As   if   to   make   it   capable   of   riding   the   wind   and   flying   in   the   sky .
The   Wu   region   has   always   claimed   fame   for   cultural   heritage ,   At   this   moment   we   have   gathered   here   noteworthy   scholars   so   diversified .
Bearing   testimony   to   the   cultural   affluence   and   accomplishment   of   this   province ,   Says   who   abundance   of   wealth   and   levies   is   the   region ' s   only   might ?
As   you   retire   into   the   breadth   and   depth   of   the   mountains ,   You   should   thoroughly   enjoy   the   highs   and   lows   of   the   terrain .
Seeing   off   the   dead   mourners   lose   their   voice ,   Seeing   off   the   living   is   often   just   as   saddening .
From   south   of   the   Yangtze ,   the   malaria   ridden   land ,   Came   no   news   of   my   exiled   friend .
At   night   I   dream   of   this   old   friend   of   mine ,   It   must   be   a   reflection   of   my   thoughts   of   him   in   daytime .
But   he   must   be   deep   in   toils ,   How   could   he   have   wings   to   hither   fly ?
What   I   saw   may   not   be   his   living   self ,   The   distance   is   far   too   great   and   anything   could   arise .
In   my   dream   he   arrived   amid   maple   green ,   When   he   left ,   deep   in   blackness   was   the   dividing   range .
Moonlight   shone   all   over   roof   raking   and   beams ,   I   wondered   whether   it   could   return   colour   to   his   face .
The   water   is   deep   and   wild   billows   make ,   I ' d   like   to   cautioned   him   to   flood   dragons   guard   against .
Around   the   river   isle   there   is   no   wave   nor   smoky   mist ,   Now   a   traveller   in   the   land   of   Chu ,   in   vain   I   am   reminiscent   of   our   friendship .
This   isolated   town   lies   at   the   foot   of   hills   against   the   sun   and   bugles   cheerlessly   blare ,   Unsociable   sentinels   stand   guard   by   the   river ,   where   I   am   to   moor   for   the   evening .
By   a   lamp   in   the   cold   I   pondered   over   my   past ,   A   sudden   cry   of   a   lone   goose   disturbed   my   light   and   worried   sleep .
I   just   dreamt   of   homecoming ,   only   to   wake   up   to   another   day   dawning   on   me ,   It ' s   been   a   year   since   I   last   a   letter   from   home   receive .
The   river   is   bleak ,   the   moon   and   the   fog   picturesque ,   Outside   the   inn   moor   fishing   boats   by   the   quay .
Shu ' s   Premier   outwitted   all   in   warfare   amongst   the   ancient   Three   Kingdoms ,   His   fame   lives   on   along   with   his   Octagonal   battle   plot .
While   the   river   perpetually   gushes   through   the   Octagonal   stone   setting ,   The   regret   of   an   lost   opportunity   to   take   over   Wu   lingers   on .
Silken   fine   is   the   grass   of   the   northern   Yan   region ,   Low   and   green   hang   branches   of   mulberry   trees   of   our   western   Qin   region .
When   you   have   finally   started   to   homecoming   desire ,   Distressed   by   your   absence   heartbroken   am   I .
Mountain   green   has   darkened   in   the   cold ,   Autumn   waters   have   eased   to   a   murmuring   rill .
Over   at   the   ferry   the   setting   sun   left   some   afterglow ,   In   the   isolated   village   yonder   smoke   begins   to   rise   from   stoves   lit .
I   am   reminded   of   your   time   here ,   intoxicated   and   unfettered   you   were ,   Singing   uninhibitedly   in   front   of   me   right   here .
Before   my   bed   floods   moonlight ,   It   might   be   frost   I   thought   to   myself .
I   raise   my   head   towards   the   moon   shining   ever   so   bright ,   Only   to   bow   to   homesickness   as   I   pine .
West   of   here ,   cicadas   sing   their   songs ,   Besieging   this   imprisoned   southerner   with   homesickness .
I   cannot   help   but   lament   as   autumn   cicadas   flap   their   wings   as   ebony   as   youthful   hair ,   And   in   the   face   of   a   greying   man   they   flit   and   sing .
As   autumn   dew   weighs   on   wings   so   thin ,   Their   symphonies   tend   to   plunge   in   crosswinds .
No   one   believes   them   to   be   a   virtuous   kind ,   Who   is   there   to   my   innocence   appreciate   and   vindicate ?
Tang   Emperor   Xuanzhong   lusted   after   a   beauty   worthy   of   taking   a   country   to   war   for ,   For   so   many   years   of   his   reign ,   unfulfilled   his   wish   remained .
There   was   a   Yang   family   whose   daughter   had   come   of   age ,   She   was   well   kempt   in   her   boudoir   unknown   to   the   social   scene .
As   she   turned   her   head ,   one   smile   enchanted   all ,   Outshining   all   women   in   the   Palace   who   in   comparison   had   their   colour   lost .
In   spring   chill ,   the   Emperor   bestowed   on   her   a   bath   in   the   Splendid   Pond ,   A   natural   thermal   spa   with   salubrious   waters   to   her   milky   skin   cleanse ;
A   maid   helped   to   support   her   lady - like   delicacy ,   Thus   began   the   Emperor \ ' s   adoration   of   this   fair   lady .
She   had   a   florid   face   and   cloud - soft   hair   adorned   with   glittering   golden   beads   that   swayed ,   Behind   bedchamber   curtains   painted   with   lotus ,   springtime   passion   was   in   play ;
Springtime   passion   made   speed   of   night   and   in   no   time   the   sun   had   risen   high ,   The   Emperor   stopped   attending   the   morning   assembly   on   state   affairs .
Pleasing   the   Emperor   and   accompanying   him   at   banquets   took   up   all   of   her   time ,   Springtime   is   for   garden   wayfaring   and   the   night - time   for   bedchamber   private   affairs .
The   Emperor \ ' s   beauty   mansions   held   three   thousand   fair   ladies ,   Whom   the   Emperor   could   have   adored   but   he   chose   to   dote   on   Lady   Yang   alone .
In   her   gilded   chamber   she   prepared   for   the   Emperor \ ' s   night   entertainment ,   After   a   banquet   on   a   majestic   pavilion   she \ ' d   waver   down   in   sensual   high .
All   of   her   brothers   and   sisters   were   awarded   with   prominent   official   titles ,   All   the   power   and   glory   because   of   her   on   one   family   fell .
Hence   all   fathers   and   mothers   of   the   world ,   Would   rather   than   boys   girls   bear   and   raise .
Soothing   singing   and   amatory   dancing   intertwined   with   strings   and   pipes ,   The   Emperor   indulged   day   and   night   ever   wanting   more .
Until   suddenly   war   drums   from   Yuyang   had   the   capital \ ' s   earth   quaking ,   Sprung   out   of   tune   was   Lady   Yang \ ' s   dance   in   the   Rainbow   Dress   and   Feather   Robe .
The   revolt   stormed   near   bringing   smoke   and   dust   to   the   palace   towers ,   The   Emperor   decided   to   south - west   retreat   with   his   cavalry   of   tens   of   thousands .
The   Emperor \ ' s   coach   with   a   jade   flower   flag   made   way   and   stops   now   and   again ,   West   of   the   capital   for   mere   tens   of   miles   they   rode ;
Then   the   army   refused   to   continue   course ,   the   Emperor   in   dilemma   had   to   consent ,   To   the   now   wailing   Lady \ ' s   execution   at   once   in   front   of   horses   for   all   to   see .
Strangled   she   was ,   her   bejewelled   hair   pieces   were   left   scattered   on   the   ground ,   Jade   and   golden   ornaments   that   used   to   adorn   her   hair .
The   Emperor   could   not   the   fair   lady   rescue   nor   bear   to   watch ,   When   he   did   look   back ,   he   wept   tears   that   flowed   also   blood .
The   bleakness   lingered   in   the   bitter   wind   storming   the   yellow   earth   sky   high ,   The   retreat   continued   through   alpine   passes   from   the   Cloudy   to   the   Sword - like .
The   foot   of   the   Emei   Mountains   in   the   Shu   region   used   to   little   traffic   see ,   Yet   lacklustre   was   the   feel   of   the   Emperor \ ' s   flag   and   daylight   appeared   weak .
The   waters   of   Shu   were   blue   and   its   mountains   green ,   The   Emperor   however   was   day   after   day   consumed   by   the   remembrance   of   love   lost .
At   his   temporary   residence ,   the   moon   offered   nothing   but   added   to   his   grieve ,   The   rain   and   bells   at   night   rang   the   sound   of   his   heart   broken   in   pieces .
After   moving   heaven   and   earth ,   the   Emperor   returned   in   his   dragon   coach ,   Stopping   at   where   his   Lady   died ,   unable   to   move   on ,   long   he   lingered .
For   beneath   the   soil   of   the   Mawei   Slopes   must   be   where   his   lady   lied ,   Though   her   beautiful   face   of   pure   jade   might   have   in   vain   sacrificed .
The   Emperor   and   his   courtiers   looked   on ,   their   collars   damp   with   tears ,   Their   loosely   reigned   horses   sauntered   eastward   towards   the   capital   gates .
The   palace   gardens   and   ponds   were   as   they   had   always   been   in   their   comeback ,   The   hibiscus   in   the   Taiye   Pond   blossomed ,   the   willows   in   the   Weiyang   Mansion   thrived ;
The   hibiscus   was   like   the   late   Lady \ ' s   face   and   the   willows   her   eyebrows ,   With   such   scenery ,   how   could   the   Emperor   not   be   reminded   of   the   Lady \ ' s   countenance ?
How   they   had   seen   together   the   peach   and   plum   blossoms   in   the   spring   breeze ,   How   they   had   watched   the   leaves   leave   phoenix   trees   in   autumn   rain .
The   Emperor   now   resided   in   the   south - western   mansion   full   of   autumn   vegetation ,   Where   stairs   were   covered   in   reddened   leaves   and   no   one   would   come   by   to   sweep .
The   operatic   circle   students \ '   hair   had   begun   to   turn   grey ,   Eunuchs   and   maids   at   the   late   Lady \ ' s   mansion   had   aged   and   faded   away .
The   palace   had   a   lonely   place   become ,   even   fireflies   of   night   could   not   it   enliven ,   The   Emperor \ ' s   lament   would   wear   a   lone   candle   to   its   end   on   sleepless   nights .
Night - hour   gongs   gonged   the   start   of   long   nights ,   Starry   light   lighted   so   bright   resembling   daybreak   time .
Palace   roof   figurines   of   mandarin   ducks   were   covered   cold   in   heavy   frost ,   With   whom   could   the   Emperor   share   the   now   warmth - lacking   kingfisher   feather   quilt ?
In   a   daze ,   the   passing   of   the   late   Lady   had   been   a   year   in   time ,   Yet   her   spirit   never   once   the   Emperor \ ' s   dream   entered   for   a   rendezvous .
A   Taoist   priest   from   Lingqiong   of   the   region   of   Shu ,   Claimed   to   with   his   sincere   and   pure   faith   dead   spirits   reach ;
As   the   Emperor   seemed   forever   engrossed   in   the   remembrance   of   the   late   Lady ,   The   priest   was   summoned   to   seek   attentively   for   her   spirit .
In   lightening   speed   he   glided   in   thin   air   and   navigated   the   clouds ,   He   searched   everywhere   in   the   sky   and   on   the   earth   but   failed   to   her   spirit   find ;
He   exhausted   all   avenues   in   heaven   and   the   nether   world ,   Boundless   and   vast   as   they   were ,   he   could   not   her   existence   bring   to   light .
Then   he   heard   of   tales   of   a   celestial   mountain   in   the   sea ,   That   lay   in   the   mid   of   misty   nowhere .
In   the   mountains   amongst   clouds   of   rainbow   colours   existed   delicate   architecture ,   And   there   lived   many   beautiful   fairies .
Of   them   there   was   a   fairy   named   True   Faith ,   same   as   the   late   Lady ,   With   whom   the   fairy   shared   much   similar   snow - white   skin   and   flowery   face .
The   priest   came   to   the   gate   of   the   golden   West   Hall   to   knock   on   a   door   of   jade ,   And   asked   the   heavenly   maid   and   matron   to   their   fairy   lady   notify .
Upon   hearing   the   arrival   of   the   Emperor \ ' s   envoy ,   The   Lady   resting   behind   her   canopy   of   nine   flowers   was   startled   and   aroused ;
Her   luxuriant   mane   was   lopsided   from   having   just   woken   up ,   She   came   to   the   main   hall   with   her   crooked   laureate   unadjusted .
Her   beauty   is   marred   by   loneliness   with   her   tears   in   streams ,   Muck   like   a   pear   flower   blooming   after   the   rain .
Their   warmth   and   love   were   left   behind   in   the   Mansion   of   Morning   Sun ,   Her   days   in   the   fairy   court   were   long   and   indefinitely   prolonged   was   time .
When   she   looked   back   to   the   temporal   world ,   She   could   not   see   Changan   the   capital   but   dusty   and   misty   skies .
What   remained   of   the   bygone   days   were   two   keepsakes ,   A   jewellery   casket   and   a   golden   hairpin   for   the   priest   to   the   Emperor   take .
One   half   of   the   hairpin   and   one   tray   of   the   casket   she   would   keep ,   Breaking   the   pin   and   the   box   into   parts ;
She   hoped   the   Emperor \ ' s   love   would   be   as   unflinching   as   their   pledge ,   So   they   could   be   reunited   in   heaven   or   on   earth   in   another   life .
Upon   bidding   farewell   to   the   Emperor \ ' s   emissary   she   reminded   him   repeatedly ,   To   relay   to   the   Emperor   a   poem   wherein   contained   their   secret   oath   .
Once   on   the   seventh   night   of   the   seventh   moon   in   the   Hall   of   Eternity ,   When   no   one   was   around   they   whispered   words   of   love   in   the   depth   of   night :
" In   heaven   above   let   us   be   one - winged   birds   and   only   in   pairs   fly ,   On   earth   let   us   be   neighbouring   trees   with   our   branches   intertwined . "
Yet   even   if   eternal   heaven   and   earth   ever   had   an   end ,   Never - ending   would   be   this   couple \ ' s   immortal   regret .
Although   I   am   a   regional   officer   used   to   shifts   of   scenes ,   Change   of   landscape   and   seasons   still   much   surprises   me .
I   see   daybreak   flushing   clouds   and   the   sea   reflecting   the   morning   glow ,   Here   comes   spring   crossing   the   Yangtze   bringing   blossoms   to   plum   and   willow   trees .
In   the   pleasant   weather   orioles   find   the   urge   to   warble ,   The   sun   shines   brightly   enlivening   even   duckweed .
Unexpectedly   comes   a   letter   with   your   well - versed   poem ,   Evoking   nostalgia   that   brings   tears   dampening   my   handkerchief .
